Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. This month we are talking about
resilience. And today in particular, I
want to talk about what makes a
relationship resilient even if both
people inside of the relationship are
not securely attached. So, it's commonly
known in the attachment world that very
often a pairing that gets together is
one person being more anxious leaning
and the other more avoidant leaning,
including partnerships where one of the
people might have some disorganized or
fearful avoidant patterning. Generally,
for those who air insecurely attached,
one person will end up inhabiting each
of these poles in the relationship
because it is what each one is familiar
with. Now, what I want to get clear from
the get-go here is that anxious avoidant
relationships or insecurely attached
relationships of any form are absolutely
not inherently doomed. In fact, they can
be vehicles for tremendous
transformation on behalf of both people
if both parties are willing and
interested in engaging with the
relationship in a new way, which means
abandoning some of the behaviors that
might feel really safe and comfortable
for us. So, what we're going to be
looking at today is some of the
unconscious mistakes that anxious
avoidant couples tend to make either
before they become attachment literate
and even in a lot of cases afterwards.
And then we're going to look at how
couples can address those directly and
start choosing strategies for navigating
the relationship that actually allow
each of them to see one another more
clearly. So without further ado, we will
get into 10 mistakes that anxious
avoidant couples very often make and
what they can do to rectify them.
Mistake number one, fixating on each
other's bad behavior in the relationship
instead of looking at how the
relationship dynamic itself is creating
a space where those behaviors keep
happening. So it is generally very easy
to point fingers at our partners and see
everything that they are in reality
actually doing wrong. Right? So what I'm
not saying here is that you should
gaslight yourself and pretend that your
partner is always behaving kindly or
respectfully towards you if that's not
true. But what secure dynamics naturally
have and insecure dynamics tend to lack
is a strong awareness of context. With
anxious avoidant couples, what very
often happens is because both of them
are naturally a little bit tuned out
from context as well as from their own
blind spots, they can't always see
clearly the ways in which they are
impacting and disregulating one another.
Insecure couples tend to think about
things in terms of right or wrong. And
each party generally has the
internalized belief on some level that
their way of relating is right and the
other person's is wrong. when once again
what we want to be looking at is how do
those conflicting worldviews of what is
right and wrong in the relationship
cause conflict and how can we address
the entire situation at hand instead of
just pointing fingers at one another.
So, for example, if the anxious person
is always exploding and getting angry,
is it possible that even though they are
being hurtful and not particularly
productive in the way that they're
getting their emotions across, there's
actually some aspect of the relationship
that is causing them to reach that
boiling point. Maybe when they express
their emotions at a lower level, they
don't get heard and integrated. And
maybe if those things were getting heard
and integrated at a lower level, the
explosions would not happen as
frequently. Or on the flip side, if the
avoidant is chronically pulling away and
needing more and more space, is it
possible that the dynamic is actually
not giving them the natural space they
need to have regular points of
connection to themselves? Are there
parts of themselves that get very subtly
rejected when they try to bring them
into the relationship dynamic? And if
so, is it possible that their pulling
away is a natural response to not being
able to bring their full selves into the
relationship because their full selves
might actually disregulate the other
person. So, there are a million
different examples of this. But
essentially, if we want to start working
against this phenomenon, what we want to
start doing is anytime there is a
recurring problem in the relationship
that feels like it is all your partner's
fault, regardless of what each of your
attachment orientations are, if you can
sit down and be with the question as a
couple, how is it possible that this
behavior is in fact adaptive within the
context of our relationship? you're
going to start surfacing some answers
that are going to get you closer to what
the actual solution is. Because very
often both people tend to think if my
partner would just stop X, Y, or Z, then
everything would be great in the
relationship. Where in reality a lot of
the time the change that is being asked
for is something that would upset the
power dynamic in a significant way that
might make both people really
uncomfortable on a subconscious level.
And we're going to get to that later on
in the video. But essentially, what we
want to focus on here is instead of
simply pointing at your partner's flaws
and deciding that they are wrong and you
are right, even if that's true, even if
they are overtly just acting like an
can you ask yourself the
question, what might be going on in the
dynamic that is causing each of us to
react the way that we are reacting? and
can we fix something at the core of this
dynamic that is actually going to lessen
the frequency of whatever behavior it is
that's so frustrating for one or both
people. So, this already gets us moving
in the direction of instead of looking
at problems as you me, it's you and me
against the problem. Mistake number two
that trips up so many anxious avoidant
couples is failing to make explicit
agreements about what they want and
expect inside of the relationship and
instead holding on to these silent
contracts or silent expectations that
they have for each other and then
becoming really resentful when the other
person is not reading their minds and
giving them what they have never
explicitly said they wanted. And so to
fix this, there's kind of two different
levels that we can address it on. One is
at the beginning of a relationship or at
any point in the relationship where it
starts becoming apparent that you're not
necessarily on the same page, you want
to start asking each other and
yourselves, do we have a shared vision
for this relationship? So, is there a
direction that we both are sure we want
to move in together? And how can we work
as a team to start getting there? And if
so, or once we get that in place, can we
make explicit a lot of things around how
we would need to relate to each other,
to our environments, and to the
relationship in order to make sure that
we are moving towards that vision. And
again, this might seem really basic to
those of you who air more secure, but I
remember one particular relationship I
had in my 20s where I was with someone
for 4 years. We did a ton of attachment
healing work within our relationship
only to get to the point where we were
finally ready to talk about what we
wanted out of our long-term relationship
and realized we are aligned on almost
nothing. But we had spent so long
fighting with each other that we never
even got to the starting line where we
were able to really sit down and make
clear what our wants and needs were long
term. And so that's the first level we
want to make sure we're addressing this
on checking in right at the beginning if
we can to see what both people actually
want to get out of the relationship. And
then the second level we want to address
this on is anytime we notice ourselves
feeling resentful towards our partner.
And I do have a video about this that
I'll link in the description of this
one. We want to be asking ourselves the
question, what am I expecting of them?
And have I made that expectation clear?
If not, it might be time for a
conversation where you go to your
partner and you can even joke about it
and go, "Hey, I've been waiting for you
to read my mind about this thing." Or,
"I have this expectation that you're
going to do this and I feel a little
embarrassed or whatever it is to be
bringing this up, but is that something
you're comfortable with because I
realized I never actually asked you?"
And this gives you the opportunity to
start bringing in more of your wants and
expectations and giving you the chance
to get them met.
Now, this might bring up a lot of other
things like fear of rejection. If you
are used to people disengaging from you
when you bring in your own wants and
needs, it might bring things up like
shame and self-disgust that you even
have things you want your partner to do
for you or needs that you want
fulfilled. But that's a great thing
because working through those instances
where we're encountering things like our
own vulnerability or our own shame,
those are the places where attachment
healing starts actually happening. if we
can find ways to work directly with what
comes up for us in the process. So using
partnerships, using intimate
relationships as opportunities to
encounter where you're blocked and start
behaving in very different ways can
potentially go a really long way towards
both people's healing. But again, we
have to get used to the process of
making the unconscious conscious and
then communicating it and seeing what
happens. Third mistake I see so many
anxious avoidant couples making. And I
think that this one is even heavily
reinforced where you go out looking for
attachment-based relationship advice is
white knuckling their way towards
appeasing one another in relationship
instead of looking at why certain things
feel so hard to do. So for example, the
most classic one that you always see in
this department is anxious parties are
almost always told just give your
avoidant partner more space. And
generally because they want the
relationship to work, the anxious party
will go, okay, I'll do it. I'll just
kind of get through the moments when I'm
really distressed and my body feels like
it's on fire, but they need space. I'll
just kind of find a way to bear it. And
then on the flip side of things, you
might have the avoidant person feeling
chronically pressured into commitment
before they are ready. And so they'll
kind of white knuckle their way through
pretending that that's what they want
with the relationship because maybe they
feel like that is the good thing to do
or the right thing to do. But the
opportunity that's getting totally lost
here is for both parties to look at why
it feels so hard for them to do that
thing. So for the anxious party, instead
of just shaming yourself for not being
good at self-regulation when your
partner needs space from you, can you
actually use this as an opportunity to
be compassionate with yourself and
curious about why that's so hard for
you? Can you ask yourself the question,
what skills would I have to learn in
order to make this feel more comfortable
for me? So the idea here is that anytime
you feel like you're doing something
simply because your relationship might
fall apart if you don't, you can use
that as an opportunity to ask yourself,
how could I not just get through this,
but actually relax into this experience?
What would it take for me to get there?
That might mean developing a lot of
inner tools that both allow you to
tolerate more space in a relationship,
but potentially also connect you to
partners who don't need as much if your
preference is to genuinely just have
more connected
relationships. And on the flip side of
things, if you air avoidant, instead of
just assuming that you should be
committing to every partnership you
enter into, what if you really looked at
what is it within that commitment that
I'm afraid of? Sometimes the reason
you're fearing commitment is because you
have not learned to draw proper
boundaries inside of your relationship
and say no when you want to say no. Or
maybe you haven't learned to see your
relationship as a resource. So you feel
like by committing to it, you're
committing to a lifetime of a one-sided
relationship where you're perpetually
responsible for regulating both yourself
and the other person. And the more you
can start uncovering what it is inside
of this commitment that is so draining
or fearinducing for you, the more you
can start trying to design a
relationship that feels a lot more
comfortable and accessible, like you can
actually exhale inside of it and don't
have to escape it in order to feel okay.
Fourth mistake that I see anxious
avoidant couples making that is such a
big one that is so avoidable is
neglecting the importance of raw
emotional expression and trying to find
the logical answer to everything. Now to
be securely attached means to be able to
integrate the raw emotional data that
your body is always providing you with
with the logical and cognitive reasoning
of your brain. But in insecurely
attached dynamics, what we tend to see
is one person who tends to neglect more
of the emotional and bodybased signals
that they're getting fed, which tends to
be the avoidant leaning person, and then
someone who tends to neglect more of the
cognitive aspects of relational
planning, which tends to be the person
who airs more anxious. Now the problem
with this is that it ends up creating a
very specific dynamic that starts an
immediate downward spiral which is the
avoidant party dismisses emotional
information as real information. So, the
anxious party, who has real, raw
emotional data that needs to be
integrated in order for the relationship
to work well, learns, I will only get my
needs seen and attended to if I can
convince my partner that there is a
logic to them, regardless of whether or
not I currently understand the logic
behind them or think it's particularly
relevant. And so when they are
experiencing a raw emotion that feels
really important for them to be seen in,
the anxious party can sometimes latch on
to whatever logical explanation or
whatever story they can make up about
their emotions that they think will get
their partner to take it seriously. The
problem is that if their partner does
take it seriously now, they're not
really working with the problem at the
level it exists at, which is the level
of emotion. So, let's say for example,
you have a couple where one partner
recently started working from home and
the other one starts getting angry when
they see their partner home during the
day, but maybe they're not really sure
why that's happening. Why is it that
when they walk into the living room and
they see their partner sitting there,
they get angry? If partner A feels like
sharing their raw emotional data, which
is anger, will not get the issue seen or
taken seriously, what they'll do is try
to find an explanation for it. So,
they'll go, "Okay, maybe I'm mad at them
because I don't like their new job." And
that might not feel 100% correct, but it
might feel like a good enough
explanation to take to their partner and
go, "Hey, I'm angry because your new job
doesn't make us enough money, and so I'm
worried about our mortgage." And then a
whole conversation starts happening on a
level where it doesn't actually exist.
Because maybe the actual problem, the
actual reason for partner A's anger is
just that they suddenly don't have
enough alone time and their body is
feeling kind of weird and frustrated as
they're trying to adjust to a new
routine. But if emotions cannot get
expressed as raw data points and dealt
with on that level, it's going to get
really messy really quickly. And the way
out of this is to start prioritizing raw
emotional data as worthwhile in and of
itself on both parties behalf.
So a lot of relationships start
drastically increasing in health levels
when they become safe places for one or
both people to bring in whatever emotion
they are feeling and say something to
the effect of I don't know where this is
coming from but I feel it and I'm
wondering if we can explore it together
and figure out what it might be related
to. This is how our relationships
increase in accuracy. And when we have
an increase in accuracy in
relationships, it gets way easier to
problem solve and way harder to get
sucked into neverending conflicts. But
for that to happen, raw emotional data
has to be valued by both people and not
dismissed. Fifth thing that tends to
hold back anxious avoidant couples is
expecting their partner to behave
perfectly securely when they know that
they are with someone who is not
securely attached. So once again, this
is an ignoring of context and when we're
doing it, we are neglecting the role
that we picked in choosing our partner
in the first place. So a lot of the
time, the very same traits that we find
initially very attractive or enticing or
convenient in our partners, they're so
stoic and strong. They're so
self-contained, or they're so good at
creating intimacy and seducing me. These
things that we love from the get-go are
very often inherent parts of our
partner's attachment patterning. If we
are constantly drawn to very stoic,
self-contained partners, that very often
comes with avoidant attachment or
emotional
unavailability. Or if we really like
when our partners kind of set the tone
and do the chasing and make sure that we
are constantly feeling validated and
wanted by them, that might very often be
a product of anxious attachment. Because
if we're not adapting to our partners'
lives in equal measure to how much
they're adapting to ours, we're unlikely
to be attracting secure people. And
we're more likely to be attracting
people who are willing to kind of bend
and contort a little bit to fit into our
lives without us having to change too
much. And so instead of looking at
patterns of who am I attracting and why,
we get attracted to who we get attracted
to and then we start judging them for
not being secure when in reality their
lack of secure attachment is likely a
big reason why we got into the
relationship with them unconsciously in
the first place. And so the more we can
own that, the more we can actually make
room for the changes that we do want to
see happening because we're aware, and
we're going to get into this shortly,
that the changes we are asking them to
make, if we want them to become more
emotionally available or if we want them
to become more independent, are in fact
in some cases going to detract from
those traits that first attracted us to
them so much. And so what we want to get
clear on here is am I holding my partner
to a standard that not only is
unrealistic because they're not secure
and they do have attachment wounding to
work through, but also that
subconsciously I might not find that
attractive if they were to achieve it.
And so the root out of this is to
identify consciously what your ideal or
fantasy version of your partner is and
then accept that your partner is a real
person. And if they are insecurely
attached, it is going to take a lot of
time and effort for them to become more
secure. And you have to be willing to
make room for that and accommodations
for that as you both work towards
security. If you are chronically holding
someone up to an ideal you have in your
head where they are either always stoic
and self-contained but totally
emotionally available when you want some
co-regulation. You are looking at a
fantasy because emotionally available
people tend to be emotionally available
in both directions. They're going to
also come to you looking for
co-regulation and expect the same type
of co-regulation out of you that they
are giving you. On the flip side, if you
are looking for a partner who is
independent only in the moments when you
want them to be independent and the rest
of the time contorting to your needs,
you are not thinking of things
realistically. So stop saying you want
your partner to be more secure if you
are not ready for what that actually
means. And it's okay to not be ready for
what that actually means. This can be a
process that can be super healthy and
generative of the two of you sitting
down together and mapping out the ways
in which you want to grow with the
awareness that there are things about
each other's insecure attachment
patterning that you actually like or
benefit from as a couple. Which brings
us very naturally to thing number six
that anxious avoidant couples often get
wrong, which is they do not make the
space that is necessary inside of the
relationship for each person to change
even in the ways that they explicitly
decide as a couple they are going to
change in. And the reason for this is
because often when we are wanting our
partners to make a change, we are not
ready for the side effects of that
change. And so our systems might start
panicking at the side effects and start
unconsciously trying to shove the person
back into the relational role that we
are subconsciously more comfortable with
them being in. So the kind of rule of
thumb here is that if you want your
anxious avoidant relationship to change
in a significant way, you have to be
ready for the power dynamic to change in
a significant way. Because what secure
relationships are is a fairly even power
dynamic. So, if you really struggle with
things like making decisions and leading
in the relationship, or if you really
struggle with taking a back seat and
letting your partner make important
decisions, you're going to really
struggle with your relationship becoming
a more secure one. And so this
absolutely can be worked with, but what
we want to do is make it an exercise in
becoming conscious about what it is that
matters to us inside of relationships as
well as which skills we are going to
need to develop to allow our partner the
space they need to grow. So again, if
you want your partner to be more
independent, great. Are you willing to
make the relationship a space where you
take their lead more? where you are more
often the one reaching out to them and
planning times to get together and
fitting yourself into their social life.
If you want your partner to be more
emotional, great. Are you ready and able
to hold the space that they're going to
need when they come to you with their
very raw, very disregulated emotions if
they have spent a lifetime suppressing
those things and don't really have a
good idea of how to work with them yet?
We have to look not just at what changes
we want our partners to make, but what
changes we are going to have to make,
including the ones that might feel
really unnatural for us in order to
support those changes. But again, the
cool thing is that in this process, we
start naturally evening out our own weak
spots. And so both people can very
authentically start working towards the
direction of secure attachment by
getting clear on what we need to do to
support each other's change processes
and then learning the skills that we
actually need to carry that out. Seventh
mistake that anxious avoidant couples
tend to very often make is the conflicts
they have get so big and take on such a
life of their own that the baby ends up
getting thrown out with the bathwater.
So, someone comes in with an issue and
the other person either gets really
defensive or shuts down or whatever it
is. And then the whole issue for the
next couple of days becomes trying to
get the other person to stop shutting
down or to stop being defensive or to
deal with the insults that one partner
doled out when they were feeling upset.
And because we end up dealing with all
of these defensive responses that come
up during conflict, the actual issue
itself can get totally lost in the
process. And that does not mean that
it's wrong to address unhealthy conflict
behaviors. It's in fact very important
to address those. But it's important to
separate out what are we angry about or
what do we need to deal with on the
level of how we handled the conflict
versus what was the core of the conflict
and did we actually resolve it. And a
lot of the time the reason why recurring
fights happen in anxious avoidant
dynamics is because both people's
inability to handle conflict well ends
up creating so many secondary problems
that the original one gets forgotten.
And what happens when an issue gets
forgotten? It comes up again and again
and again. And so it can be a really
useful practice for anxious avoidant
couples to at the end of a fight or at
the end of a conflict actually look back
and go, "Wait a minute, what started
this? And did we address that? Are we
both satisfied with the solution that we
found for that thing? If not, this fight
is likely to just keep reoccurring." So
if you find yourself in this pattern a
lot, it can be really helpful just to
hash out explicitly when you are
debriefing how much of this argument or
conflict was about the patterns that
come up for us when in conflict versus
how much of it was focused on addressing
the original problem. This is how you
start resolving conflicts on multiple
levels and actually lessen your chances
of them reoccurring in the first place
as well as lessening your chances of
moving through them poorly. Eighth
problem that is very common to anxious
avoidant couples is that they are not
projection literate. So all attachment
relationships are going to bring out our
projections. So ways in which we are
looking at a human being who is standing
in front of us in real time and seeing
somebody else from our past or listening
to stories in our head about how we
think they should be different based on
things that we have internalized about
what it means to be a good or bad
partner. And generally what happens in
insecurely attached dynamics is that if
one person projects onto another person
and says something like, "Well, you just
always think this," the other person is
very likely to get defensive and go, "I
do not always think this. Therefore, I
don't have to listen to anything you're
saying." And both people can get so
locked in this battle of one person
trying to force a reality onto the other
and the other one denying that reality
that neither of them stop and look at
what is actually happening here which is
a projection is online. And projections
are often really powerful growth tools
if we can learn to be conscious about
them. What that means is that both
people need to stop being so panicked
about being misperceived, which
absolutely is how it's natural to feel
when someone is projecting something on
to you, or when you are so sure that
something is going on for another
person, they just won't admit it, which
is generally how it feels when we have a
projection. Both parties need to be able
to pause, be with the discomfort of the
experience, and carve out a little bit
more space for the other person's
reality to be explored. That doesn't
mean it needs to be accepted, just that
we need some more room for exploration
to happen. So that means actually
entertaining for a moment. What if there
is a signal inside of the muddle that is
this projection? So these are words that
a really good friend of mine always
likes to use when referencing
projections. The signal is the little
piece of truth that exists inside of
what is being said. And the muddle is
all of the crap that's incorrect around
it. So, for example, if partner A is
saying to partner B, "You don't care
about me." Partner B might get really
defensive about that because they know
they do care about their partner, right?
So, they're reacting to the muddle, all
of the untruths that are surrounding the
potential kernel of truth. Whereas,
partner A is really focused on the
kernel. And the kernel for them is that
they don't feel cared about in some way
that's significant to them, but they
don't know how to communicate that
precisely enough. So they're
communicating it incorrectly. And a lot
of the time when we're working with
projections, things do not ever get
resolved until both people are able to
acknowledge both the signal and the
muddle. There is something real and
something important inside of the
emotional experience of the projector.
So the person who's doing the
projecting. And there is also something
very real and very much worth protecting
inside of the defensiveness of the
project. So the person who is having
something projected onto them and both
of those things need to be explored. So
when you are being projected upon, can
you be with the experience of how
uncomfortable it is and acknowledge that
even though what this person is saying
is not true, there's probably something
that is true that they are experiencing
and communicating incorrectly. So maybe
you absolutely do care about them, but
there are some ways in which you're a
little bit dismissive or in which you're
missing their experience. And maybe
until that gets addressed and really
pulled up explicitly and worked on, the
projections are just going to keep
coming. And on the other side, if you're
the one doing the projecting, are you
able to hold space for the fact that
this other person is telling you their
experience does not match what you are
telling them their experiences? And is
it possible that you are both right?
that both there is a way in which you
feel uncared for and a way in which they
feel as though they care for you
immensely, but that doesn't erase your
experience. It just means you're not
quite there yet. There's still a lot of
muddle surrounding the signal. And you
need to be able to work as a team to get
to that kernel of truth by clearing away
all the untruths, which you're only
going to get to if both of you cooperate
in the archaeology. So, if both of you
are willing to say, "Okay, I don't know
why you feel so differently about this
than I do, but let's try to figure out
what might be going on that neither of
us are fully conscious yet." And often,
that is where some of the most valuable
learning experiences come from inside of
our close relationships. When we become
willing to go searching for the truth
together instead of assuming that one of
us must have it, and whoever makes their
point the most emphatically is going to
have their truth prevail. That might be
how power dynamics work, but it is not
how the truth works. So once again, this
is about getting on the same team around
a problem and deciding instead of seeing
this person as my enemy, we will see
this problem, this conflict cycle that
we're stuck in as the problem and we
will work together to get to the bottom
of it. Ninth mistake that anxious
avoidant couples so frequently make is
they do not foster relationship dynamics
that are conducive to saying I'm sorry
or doing repair work because both
parties tend to feel so threatened by
conflict that admitting that they have
been wrong or that they are seeing
things differently now feels like giving
up their entire position. And so
generally what needs to get worked on
here is we have to really look at how we
are responding to our partners coming to
us in a state of
humility. If they come up to us and they
apologize for something they did, do we
start scorekeeping and go, "Yes, you did
that and you did these 10 other things
that you never took responsibility for."
and kind of see their state of humility
as an opportunity to hammer home more of
our points because very often that does
not inspire them coming to us in the
future in a humble state. It inspires
future defensiveness. But it might feel
really tempting to do that if we find
that our partners are so rarely in a
humble state. And so if we get them in
this state where they are willing to
admit they did something wrong, oh my
god, we have to get in all the other
things that they were wrong and maybe
they can take responsibility for those
too, right? We might overseize the
opportunity in a way that does not
really inspire future instances of them
coming to us with apologies. Or we might
feel really morally outraged by what
they did. So if they're coming to us and
apologizing for it, we might immediately
launch into a long rant about how
everything they did was wrong and how we
will not stand for it instead of taking
the bid for connection that is being
extended to us and finding a way to
express how we feel in a way that is not
just pointing the finger at them and
their bad behavior, but sharing with
them the impact that their actions had
on us. That's how we actually get in
connection around repair work, right?
Instead of seeing it as an opportunity
to finally let our viewpoint triumph
over the other person's, we want to look
at how do I receive their apology, meet
them in this state of humility and also
embody that humility and figure out as a
couple where our wires are getting
crossed here. If we are chronically
stuck in scorekeeping, we make the
relationship a hostile place for
humility because humility gets punished
and that is the last thing we want to be
doing if we want more collaboration. So,
what we want to do is just be really
conscious about what is coming up for us
in these instances. If our partner
apologizes to us and we really want to
pummele them with 10 other things they
did wrong that they're not taking
responsibility for, can we hold that
tension in our body and can we report to
them what that feels like? If we're not
yet ready to meet that in that humble
state of let's work together, can we
tell them something like, "Hey, I really
appreciate the apology and there's all
of this other stuff I'm still really
upset about and I don't know what to do
about it because I don't feel like I can
honestly reconcile with you until we
also deal with this other stuff." Can we
deal with that right now or do you think
we should save it for another time? This
is the practice of holding our emotions
in our body, observing them, and being
skillful about how we communicate them.
And on the flip side, if you come to
your partner in a humble state with an
apology, and you find that you are
getting shamed or getting pummeled with
other wrongs, can you instead of
shutting down or getting defensive, hold
that energy in your body, be aware of
it, and communicate it. I want to
address this stuff and I'm feeling
really defensive or maybe really angry
because I really wanted what I was
saying in my original apology to be
received by you and for us to work with
that. Again, anytime we're changing a
relational dynamic, it means we're going
to be moving in new ways that might feel
uncomfortable at first, but that
ultimately get us a lot closer to that
secure, healthy dynamic. And essentially
in layman's terms, this is just about
making the relationship environment one
where mistakes are not heavily punished.
Right? On even a wider scale, I feel
like you see so many people on the
internet complaining about everyone's
lives being fake and complaining about
everyone being narcissistic or whatever
it is. But then look at what happens
when people mess up or make a mistake.
And we are so quick to just villainize
and cancel people. Of course, that puts
people on the defense and makes people
really cautious about showing their true
selves to the world. If we live in
hostile environments that are not
friendly to mistakes getting made and
worked with, it is going to be a lot
less likely for people to admit their
shortcomings and ask for help. And we
have to keep this in mind in our close
relationships. If we want people to be
more authentic with us, we have to make
the relationship dynamic into a place
where mistakes are welcomed in and
worked with. And the 10th and final
mistake that I see anxious avoidant
couples making very frequently that
could totally change their relationships
with each other and themselves if they
were to do this differently is they
panic and double down on their original
patterning when they are stressed or
facing
ambiguity. And this is so sad because
when life presents us with ambiguous
situations, when we feel threatened
either inside of our relationship or by
our life conditions, the best thing we
can possibly do is have another person
we can turn to for
co-regulation. But instead, very often
what happens when either party is
stressed is they double down on their
most unhealthy attachment responses. So
those who air more avoidant might try to
control the situation or detach from the
stressors and those who are more anxious
might become hyperfixated on things and
they might take those energies out on
each other when what they could be doing
is turning towards each other and going
hey life is really overwhelming right
now. The decisions we are up against as
a couple are really overwhelming right
now. What if we leaned on each other to
get through them? What if we accepted
that this situation we're in sucks? You
having different needs than me sucks
because we like each other and we want
to be together. That might not be an
option, but that doesn't mean we have to
shame each other or hate each other for
being different. We could just get on
the same team and accept that life puts
people in a lot of really uncertain and
scary situations and it helps to have
someone to hold on to through that. And
this is exactly what you see in secure
dynamics. When things hit the fan in
life, when needs start being in
conflict, when people have different
opinions on how to navigate through some
new challenge that you're faced with as
a couple, they look at all those
challenges. They internalize them in
their own ways. But they also lean on
each other emotionally to get through
them. And when you can start to do this
as a couple, when you can start to see
your problems as again, not me against
you, but me and you against the problem,
even if the problem is our own
relational patterning and our own
attachment styles, not only is your bond
with each other likely to deepen
immensely, but having that space of
safety and co-regulation is going to
equip both of you to deal with the
external challenges more effectively.
So, the saddest loop that anxious
avoidant couples tend to get stuck in is
when they are both stressed, they make
each other the enemy and double their
stress instead of joining forces and
cutting their stress in half. But this
is luckily how you more naturally begin
to frame problems and tackle them as you
gain more secure attaching
skills. All right, biz list could be 10
times longer than this, but I am going
to leave it at that for today. Feel free
to add your own below. I love seeing you
guys support each other in the comments.
I truly think I have one of the most
wholesome comment section on YouTube.
There are so many pieces of good advice
and encouragement that I see you guys
giving in there. So, please add your own
things to this list and start talking to
each other about strategies for working
with those things because we are all
each other's best resource. All right, I
will leave it at that, but as always, I
love you guys. I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again really soon.
[Music]