Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. This month on this channel, we're
talking about resilience. And today,
what I want to talk about is finding our
way out of states of depression. And the
first thing that I want to get really
clear on is that when I say depression,
what I am not talking about is a state
of grief or a state of loss or sadness.
What I'm talking about is a state of
being unable to access our true
emotions. So states of feeling numbed
out or like whatever is alive for us
inside of our bodies is not accessible
to us. So when I talk about working
one's way out of depression and this is
all filmed based on personal experience
as depression is something that I have
dealt with on and off throughout the
course of my life. What I'm talking
about is actually reconnecting to the
parts of ourselves that can feel the
entire range of emotion rather than the
parts of ourselves that want to retreat
in fear or back away from feelings that
are difficult. And the reason that I
wanted to make this video in this way is
because it was a framing that really
helped me in my last depressive episode.
There's an exercise I learned that I
never forgot when I was studying NLP or
neurallinginguistic programming, which
is a coaching modality that's trying to
get at what small actions we take on a
day-to-day basis that perpetuate what
we're going through. And so basically
the way the exercise works is that you
imagine that whatever it is you're going
through, so in this case for myself, I
was using it to model my own depression,
is something that you are going to
outsource to another person for a day.
So if I were doing a session like this
with an NLP coach essentially I would go
in and they would ask me okay if you are
going to give me your depression so I
will do it for you tomorrow. What is it
that I would have to do to make sure
that I am getting your depression right?
So what actions would I take first thing
in the morning to make sure that I stay
depressed through the morning? What
actions would I take in the afternoon?
What thought patterns would I focus on?
How would I respond to other people? How
would I think of the future? What
stories would I tell myself about
myself? And the idea here is not to say
that you are the sole cause of anything
that you are feeling. It's to look at
where we have these choice points that
we might not notice we have when we are
feeling disempowered. So when we are
feeling like we are stuck in looking at
things through a very narrow scope which
is very often what's happening when we
are depressed using an exercise like
this can help us gain some perspective
on all of the small ways in which we're
pushing away our actual feelings and
where we could make a different choice
potentially to get back in touch with
them. So, I'm going to go over 10 ways
that I tend to keep myself depressed
unconsciously when I'm going through a
state of depression, as well as what the
opposite of those things might look
like, and how if you recognize yourself
in any of these, you might be able to
start reconnecting to the authentic
emotion that exists below the surface of
depression. Because in my opinion, it is
always always the reconnection to
authentic emotion that gets us out of
these depressive states. So the first
thing I would do if I was trying to hand
my depression over to someone and allow
them to do it for me for a while is I
would tell them as soon as you wake up
in the morning, the first thing I want
you to do is become panicked at the
thought that you need to map out your
entire future perfectly all at once. And
you should not even think about taking a
step forward until you have that perfect
future mapped out. Very often for
myself, I find that depression shows up
when an old dream that I had or an old
way of doing things or maybe an old way
of relating to people is no longer
working in my life. But because I don't
want to sit in that existential void of
loss and loneliness and not knowing what
comes next, what I tend to do when I
feel things crumbling is I start trying
to reconstruct my vision of a future
that would allow me to bypass feeling
the pain of whatever it is in my life
that is no longer working or that's
ending because I can immediately replace
it with a very polished and positive
vision of the future. The problem is
that my body is usually not on board
with that vision of the future because
what my body wants to do is greet. And
so the opposite of this, the opposite of
getting fixated on a perfect polished
future that your body secretly just is
not ready to step into the way you wish
it was yet. The opposite of that is
staying present with whatever feelings
are there while accepting that you just
don't know yet what the future's going
to hold. And this is a position that
it's very intimidating to be in because
it's a state of uncertainty.
But the reason it's so important to be
present with feelings of loss, of grief,
of anger, is because they are teaching
us important things about what matters
to
us. And those things are the lessons we
need to learn in order to build a future
that makes sense.
We cannot skip over the period of loss
where we are making sense of what
happened that caused us to let go of
parts of our lives that we don't want to
let go of. We need to be able to
internalize those lessons in order to
build a new future that authentically
flows out of the past. And if we're
trying to rush too quickly ahead, a lot
of the time what happens is we just end
up making the same mistakes over and
over again.
And so what I like to think about
whenever I can if I find myself in kind
of a valley of depression is what moves,
however small, however seemingly
insignificant, does my body
authentically want to make right now. So
this is about learning to get familiar
with the very subtle yeses and nos of
your body in the present moment as the
exact person you are right now. So the
opposite of getting fixated on this
imaginary future where you can bypass
all of the pain is staying present with
the pain as much as you can of whatever
is happening in your life and feeling
through it. Feeling where your energy
naturally wants to go and where it
doesn't. And sometimes that means a
really long period of rest needs to
happen before your body wants to get up
and feel strong and capable and excited
again. But what's important is listening
to that rather than resisting it in
favor of trying to force your body to
conform to a future that it just might
not be ready for yet. The second thing I
would do if I were giving someone
instructions on how to become and stay
depressed on my behalf is I would tell
them to not adjust their expectations
whatsoever in this period of depression
from what my expectations for myself are
when I am functioning at full capacity
and thriving in life. Very often the
reason why we fall into these freeze
states or these states where it just
feels impossible to get connected to
feeling is that we tell ourselves
stories about how we should be feeling
and then we pummel ourselves with shame
when our natural energy just does not
align to that. It does not matter how
competent, how successful, how
well-rounded, how loved and supported we
all are. We are always going to have
periods of life where we are thriving
and periods of life where we are just
hanging on and surviving and getting
through them. And if during those
survival periods we're expecting
ourselves to act the same way we do in
those thriving periods, we are going to
end up in a very long struggle against
our natural energy. And so to work with
this, I came up with this idea when I
was a teenager actually that's helped me
through almost every depressive period,
which is that when I recognize and I'm
ready to admit to myself, okay, I'm
depressed right now. I'm in a state
where I don't have access to my natural
energy supplies. I ask myself the
question, how can I be the best worst
version of myself right now? So, not the
best version, not the version of me that
is hitting it out of the ballpark in
every area, but how do I manage the
energy that's actually online for me
right now as well as I possibly can? And
so, in the back of my head, I kind of
think of this as my surviving protocol.
When I'm thriving, my energy kind of
directs my life for me. When I'm
surviving, there are certain ways I need
to make sure that I am keeping myself
okay. So, I need to make sure that I am
eating in a certain way, that I'm
getting enough sleep, that I am at the
least doing one thing a day or leaving
the house once a day or talking to one
person a day. And I call this kind of my
bare minimum survival strategy. And
sometimes that strategy just has to get
enacted. And it's actually allowing
ourselves to fall back on strategies
like this that allow us to reconnect
with our dignity. If we are telling
ourselves, I will only care about or
love you when you are at your best,
we're going to keep ourselves in a state
of self-hatred at the time when we need
our own support the most. So, having
those fallback plans, having that
survival protocol that you can move
towards during the periods where you
just do not have the natural energy that
you wish you had can go a long way in
helping you preserve your dignity enough
to get back in connection with yourself.
Third thing I would tell someone if I
were outsourcing my depression to them
is I would say no matter what anytime
the thought comes into your brain, why
are you depressed? What is going on for
you in your life or your environment
that might be causing this? Tell
yourself the story, this is absolutely
random and has nothing to do with what's
happening outside of my mind. So tell
yourself things like this has nothing to
do with my circumstances. A different
person would feel perfectly fine right
now. this is weakness or a character
flaw or just anything in that category
as opposed to recognizing that your
inner and outer world are deeply
related. And so if I am actually trying
to get out of my depression and
reconnect with my authentic feelings, a
thing I like to do during depressive
episodes is what I call an ideals audit.
So, an ideals audit is kind of going
through my values, which includes my
close relationships, the goals that I
have for my life, the things that I care
about, and asking myself, do I still
feel aligned with all of these things?
Or is there something about, let's say,
the way I'm approaching a certain
relationship or the goals that I've set
out for myself that once fit really
well, but that don't really fit anymore
in terms of where my curiosity and my
energy wants to flow now.
And very often I find that when I'm in a
state of depression, it's because some
ideal of mine no longer fits my life,
but I haven't consciously recognize that
yet and become ready to let it go. So
what this is about is getting really
curious about your own inner experience.
And rather than telling yourself that
the way you feel is random and not
connected to anything real, you can take
the time, if you let yourself, to
actually get really explicitly clear on
how your inner feeling state is
connected to your outer world. And then
you can work your way towards
reconnecting to your outer world in a
way that is a more natural mirror of
what's going on inside of you and what
your values and goals are at this stage
of your life. which again means getting
connected to those really subtle yeses
and nos that exist inside of your body
regardless of what you think you should
want or feel drawn into or drawn away
from. The longer we stay fixated on
those shoulds and keep trying to conform
our energy toward them, the longer we
generally stay feeling disconnected.
Fourth thing I would do just in case for
good measure if I were trying to get
someone else to feel my depression for
me and perpetuate it for me is I would
say to them at least once a day, think
of the people in your life who have
wronged you. And tell yourself very
emphatically, I will not be okay until
this person comes back and fixes the way
that I am
feeling. So, this is about staying stuck
in a state of feeling like our emotions
are outside of our own control. And this
is not to say that the relationships in
our lives do not affect us. Of course,
they do. But there's a difference
between letting something affect us and
actually feeling the pain of being
abandoned or mistreated or let down by
somebody we trusted. There's a world of
difference between feeling that pain,
mourning it, learning the lessons that
it's there to teach us, and then moving
forward with new
perspective, and sitting around waiting
for that person to come back and change
the way we feel for us. But there have
been so many periods of my own life
where I've realized that a big reason
why I'm feeling disconnected from my
emotions is because I'm not ready to
accept that I have lost somebody. or
that I have lost some part of a
relationship that I wanted to keep the
same with somebody who is changing and
not relating to me in that way anymore.
And so instead of feeling the pain of
that, I've put my emotions on ice and
waited for them to come back and make
the wrongs right. And anytime we are
putting our feelings on ice, especially
feelings that matter to us immensely,
it's a recipe for disconnecting from our
emotional selves. The opposite of which
is recognizing our hurt, recognizing the
hopelessness and the helplessness that
is inherent to being let
down, actually internalizing that and
adjusting the expectations we've been
holding on to for those relationships in
the future. And it feels very ironic a
lot of the time to recognize that
depression can actually be our body's
resistance to sadness itself or to grief
or to mourning. Again, depression is not
about being stuck in a state of sadness.
It's about being stuck in a state of
nonfeing. And sometimes that sadness,
that acceptance, that change we didn't
want has happened. and that we can't go
backwards is the very thing that allows
us to get reconnected to our emotional
centers which include the grief and pain
and sadness that we might need to move
through. But then on the other side of
that, they also include the hope and joy
that draws us towards whatever comes
next. So those are the four things I
would do if I wanted to tell someone how
to stay stuck in a state of depression.
So, in a state of being disconnected
from their own feelings. And the next
things we're going to go over is what I
would tell someone if I wanted to make
sure that no matter what, they
absolutely did not get reconnected to
the world outside of themselves. So, if
my goal was to make sure that somebody
else on my behalf did not begin starting
over, the first thing I would tell them
is no matter what, you must keep
punishing yourself by denying yourself
joy. When I'm depressed and I find
myself in an anhidonic, joyless state, a
story I often tell myself that works in
the direction of keeping me depressed is
once I start functioning at full
capacity again, then I am allowed to
feel excited and have good feelings and
feel proud of myself. Then I am allowed
to want things again and go for things
again. and telling myself that I have to
earn my own joy is really effective at
keeping me
down. The opposite of this is
recognizing that joy is imperative for
coming out of a state of depression.
That happiness we may feel like we
didn't earn is actually very often an
organizing principle for the rest of our
psyches. We are oriented towards wants,
towards things that we desire. And so
when we identify things that we want and
we give ourselves permission to hope for
them if and when those things come into
our awareness, the rest of our system
naturally starts organizing around how
to get those things. And so this is a
ridiculous story, but in my last
depressive episode, I had not felt
anything in the realm of joy or
excitement for months and months and
months. And then one day I was scrolling
mindlessly through Instagram and for
some reason I got marketed a cruise and
I was looking at this advertisement,
this photo of a giant ship and my body
just went, "Yeah, I want to go on a
giant boat." And it was the first sense
of joy or intrigue or passion for
anything that I had felt in months. And
I had no idea why. But I just went, you
know what? Even though this is not a
wise financial move, and even though I
have no idea why I want to go on this
boat so badly, I'm going to book a
cruise for a month from now. And every
single morning for that next month, I
woke up with a sense of energy that was
distinctly different than I'd had for
almost half a year at that point because
I had said yes to something in my body
that felt like a yes, however ridiculous
and however disconnected it felt from
the rest of my life. And that very act
of saying yes to something reminded me
what it felt like to be awake and in the
world. And that began an upward spiral
out of depression. And it all just
started from allowing myself to have a
very silly moment of joy and desire and
sticking with it. And so if we want to
start reconnecting to life again, if
that is our goal, we have to listen to
joy and we have to treat it as an
organizing principle instead of
something that we need to earn in order
to access. The next thing I would tell
someone if I wanted them to stay
depressed and not start coming out of it
is no matter what you do, focus on
eliminating your bad behaviors and do
not focus on adding in new healthier
ones. Tell yourself you have to get rid
of all the bad stuff you're doing before
you can start doing things that are good
for you. So years ago, I was taking this
holistic nutrition program at a school
called the Institute for Integrative
Nutrition. And there was this principle
they had that I absolutely love called
crowding out. So crowding out is when
you are working with a client, if you
are a health coach or a nutritionist or
something like that, who's having
trouble of getting rid of things in
their diet that they know are unhealthy,
but that they keep craving. The idea is
that as their coach, you want to
encourage them instead of fixating on
getting rid of the bad stuff to just
start adding in a whole bunch of healthy
foods to their diet, including healthy
foods that are sweet if they have a
sweet tooth or whatever it is. And the
idea is that if you start setting
positive goals, so instead of I will
stop eating chips today, saying I will
get X amount of servings of fruits and
vegetables today, eventually you're just
going to be too full on healthy foods to
be able to fit in much in the way of
unhealthy foods. And this metaphorically
is something I love to apply to my life
when I'm feeling depressed. So if I do
want to start re-engaging with my life
again, instead of saying, "Okay, I have
to fix my sleep schedule, my work
schedule, etc., etc., To get out of this
state of depression, what if I told
myself, I'm going to go hang out with my
friends every single day for a week. I'm
going to go work on a project that
interests me every single day for a
week. I am just going to try to connect
with the things that I know I love and
that feel healthy and inspiring and
growing to me. And I'm going to let my
bad habits exist right alongside them.
And I find that more often than not,
this strategy is also a wonderful
organizing principle where the more I
get those good, healthy hits of
dopamine, the more my system naturally
wants to take healthier action. It wants
me to sleep enough that I can enjoy my
day the next day because my body knows
there's something interesting happening
tomorrow. If I'm not happy with my
eating habits, but I just start doing
hard exercise that I enjoy, I find that
I naturally start craving the foods that
are best going to support my body in
those activities. So the idea here is
that once again, instead of trying to
figure out our entire future at once, we
just want to take the next most aligned
steps. Sometimes we cannot see step 10
until we have taken steps one through to
9. And keeping that in our awareness and
remembering that action begets action
can convince us to start taking those
steps in the right direction even when
our system feels as though it's
hopeless. Because often the more we get
moving in the direction of where we want
to go, the more the path reveals itself.
It just sometimes takes a little bit of
willpower to force oursel to get on that
path before the sun has risen on it and
when it still feels kind of dark and
scary. The last thing I would encourage
someone to do if they did not want to
start taking the first steps out of
depression would be to make sure that
they do not put their best foot forward
and try at anything again until they
have found their way out of depression
and are once again
thriving. When we are in depressed
states, what we desperately need is
mirrors of our potential. So the more we
can show up to things, the more we can
try at things, the more we can show
other people what we're capable of doing
now in the state that we are in, the
more our best selves, our bravest
selves, our most ambitious selves starts
to get reflected back to us when we show
that version of ourselves to other
people. But if we are committed to
staying small until we are perfectly
polished and all ready to go, we will
stay small forever. Because the way we
get big is by showing people the best
parts of ourselves, having those parts
reflected back to us, and then building
continuously on them. So, we actually
need to be seen in these states almost
more than any other time because it's
how we get out of these states is
allowing other people to meet us where
we're at. Accepting that we can meet
ourselves where we're at and through
that process where we are at naturally
changes. All right, we're coming near
the end here, but the last few things I
want to touch on is if I found myself
starting to get back in motion. So, if I
accidentally found that I was getting
less depressed, here's the advice I
would give someone if I were trying to
outsource the continuation of my
depression to them that would make sure
that their progress will get thed. The
first thing I would say is make sure
that you are checking in on your own
progress constantly and every time you
take one step forward, expect it to
solve your entire life all at once. So
this is a cognitive bias that I think
it's very easy to fall into when we have
been struggling for a long time where we
want to kind of redeem the periods of
time that we spent in depression. So I
will very often watch things like my
work piling up or my friendships going
neglected when I'm depressed and tell
myself I have to muster up the energy as
soon as I'm feeling better to make good
on everything that I have let slide
while I was depressed. which is the
perfect recipe for putting so much
pressure on myself that it becomes
almost impossible to return to life at a
normal pace, especially because I'm
probably still not back at full energy
yet. So, what I find works a lot better
than this is just focusing on increasing
my lux surface area for a period of
time. This is a concept I did not come
up with. I found it on Twitter, but I
don't know who said it first, but
essentially the idea of a luck surface
area is that you just want to take as
many steps as you can towards the places
in life where you most want to get
lucky. So, if you really want to find a
partner, increasing your luck surface
area might look like figuring out what
types of events someone you would like
to date would probably go to and then
going to a whole bunch of those and just
increasing the likelihood that you might
meet someone who you're really
interested in. or professionally.
Increasing your luck surface area might
look like talking to a whole bunch of
people about the kind of work you would
love to be doing or putting together a
portfolio or projects that you can show
to people to really showcase what your
interests and skills are. And the more
you do this, the more you start engaging
in the directions you would like to go
towards, the more you increase your
chances of the things that you want
inside of yourself being met and
mirrored in your external environment.
So you might not be able to redeem your
whole life in a couple of steps, but you
can keep moving in the direction of
things that might eventually pay off.
And so I usually like to set concrete
periods of time where I tell myself, I'm
going to identify a direction I want to
move in and I'm not going to check until
6 months from now or until I have taken
30 steps in this direction to see if I'm
progressing. Because most often what
happens is the more you move in those
directions, the luckier you get. But if
you are expecting any individual steps
to solve everything or redeem everything
at once, it's going to get really easy
to get discouraged. Once you pick a
direction you want to go in, give
yourself time for those changes to start
compounding. The next thing I would tell
myself if I wanted to thwart my own
progress as much as I possibly could is
invoid embarrassment like the plague. So
very often when we are depressed, it's
because we are mourning or needing to
let go of some old ideal or some way of
existing or relating to people or doing
things that once worked really well for
us. And what tends to happen when we do
go through the period of mourning and
letting go of something is that we then
have to develop skill in a new area
which tends to feel so awkward, so
uncomfortable, so embarrassing and
humiliating. And it's just worth keeping
in mind that if we are feeling a little
bit emotionally fragile, those feelings
are going to hit us harder. But they can
also be a clear sign that we are on the
right path. So, when it comes to the
phrase fake it till you make it, I think
that that is terrible advice if what you
are trying to make it in is a field or a
goal that you don't feel like you're
authentically wanting. But if you know
for sure that there's a direction you
want to go in and you feel excitement
and nervousness about it and as you're
stumbling towards it, you're messing
things up and getting them wrong and
feeling embarrassed, that is when it's
generally okay to just let all of that
embarrassment be part of the growing
pain process. Do not fake your life in
the wrong direction. But if you need to
fake it till you make it in the right
direction, accept that all of those
awkward moments and all of those
missteps are going to be part of
choosing a new path that feels more
aligned to you. And you can not only
embrace all of that, you can actually be
proud of it because it just means that
your values and your self-alignment is
more important to you than some outdated
version of your ego that needs to be let
go in order for you to move into what
you are going to love about your life
next. And the last thing that I would
encourage anybody who wants to stay
depressed indefinitely to do is to keep
the things they want a secret until
those things come true. But if what
someone wanted was to not stay
depressed, I would encourage them to
start talking about what their
curiosities are, what their desires are,
and what their growth path looks like as
much and to as many people as humanly
possible. And the important part here is
to not be doing this in a dissociated
way. So what this is not is taking that
imaginary future fantasy that your body
does not feel like moving towards and
telling everybody about that. What it
means is being open with the people in
your life about what your body is saying
yes to now. What direction it feels
called towards now even though that
direction maybe doesn't feel like it
makes a lot of sense. And the reason I
would encourage this is because it is
the number one way that I have started
finding my way out of depression in the
past. So sometimes that's looked like
just saying to everyone I come across, I
am looking for a community right now. I
am really looking for people who have
similar interests to me and here's what
they are and I want to meet as many of
those people as I can and I want to
spend as much time with them as I can
and eventually I would get connected to
the right people or saying to everybody
around me I don't feel alive in my work
right now but here's something I have
this thread of curiosity towards that is
just pulling me in a certain direction
and I want to learn as much about that
as I
And hey, here's what I am learning about
it cuz I'm giving myself permission to
devote time to it. And before you know
it, you're attracting people in who have
those same interests, who have those
same threads of curiosity, and maybe
they've followed them a lot further than
you. And so, it's really fun to connect
and learn from those people. But the
number one way we get out of these
states of resisting the external world
is getting connected to what is
happening for us internally. However
much we want it to not be true, however
much we wish it would align with
something else that we think we want
from our lives. And we learn to honor
what is actually in our bodies in the
moment. And then the more we grow to
accept those things, the more we allow
ourselves to reach out into the world
and try to find mirrors for them. And
the more we get those mirrors in small
ways, the more we start to see the
connection between our inner world and
our outer world as one that is fluid and
generative and nurturing for the people
that we actually want to be in our
bodies. And living this way for myself
has always felt like the most profound
opposite of depression. Honoring
whatever is actually there for me.
Giving myself concrete time and energy
and resources that I allow myself to
devote to honoring whatever is alive in
my body and then giving myself
permission to move forward in a new
direction. Not to say that this is
always easy, but it's to say that if we
want to stop doing these things that
perpetuate depression endlessly, we have
to be willing to honor our internal
experience for exactly what it is. All
right, I think I'm going to leave this
at that for today. But as always, any
questions that you guys have coming up
as you've gone through this video, or if
there are any ways that you're
recognizing you're keeping yourself
stuck in a state of disconnection from
your feelings, as well as what the
opposite of that thing is, I would love,
love, love to see you sharing that in
the comments. I have seen so many
amazing exchanges in the comment section
between people who are just able to
connect on things that they have been
through and things they have learned
that are now super useful to other
people. So, please use that as a
resource. And as always, I love you
guys. I hope you're taking care of
yourselves in whatever way feels right
to you right now. And I will see you
back here again really soon.
[Music]