Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel, or welcome if you're new
here. For the past month or so on this
channel, we've been talking about
resilience. And I was more or less ready
to put this series to bed and move on to
the next one. But there was a particular
video that kept getting requested over
and over again in the comments section
that I figured this series was probably
just incomplete without. So, I made a
couple of videos that talked about
moving through periods of either
depression or hardship. And in both
cases, I talked about something that I
like to do called an ideals audit. So,
when I find myself in a valley of
depression or in a prolonged state of
just feeling disconnected from myself,
my emotions, my life, what the world
seems to want for me. This is a practice
that I like to do to start drawing my
attention towards the areas where I
might be hanging on to ghosts from the
past in the form of ideals or hopes that
I had for my life that I haven't
realized have long expired. And I want
to start this off with a story from a
training that I went to over 10 years
ago when I was doing my undergraduate
degree in psychology. And I was working
as a peer support person for my
university's counseling service. So they
had an after hours network where people
who were struggling with something when
therapists were not available for dropin
hours could go talk to a student
volunteer who would just kind of sit
with them and be present with them in
whatever it was that they were
experiencing distress around. And in
order to become one of these peer
volunteers, I went to a series of
trainings that were led by my school's
counseling network. And I'll never ever
forget one particular training where a
counselor who specialized in depression
came into the training room. And the
first thing he did was take a black
piece of construction paper and tape it
onto the wall. And the wall of the room
was very large and expansive. And I
think it was painted a soft kind of
beige color. And he said, "When you have
someone in front of you who is dealing
with depression, they are only able to
see this much of the wall." And he took
his hands and he framed where he had put
that black piece of construction paper
up. And he said, "Your job is not to sit
there and tell them, actually, you're
wrong and the wall is beige. The wall,
as far as they can see it, is black.
Your only job is to help them steadily
expand their point of view until they
can see beyond this one patch of wall.
The reason this felt like such a
powerful metaphor for me and continues
to is because the question that I was
left with at the end of that session was
why would this person, whoever it is
that we're talking about, whether it's
someone coming into the counseling
session or ourselves when moving through
depressive episodes, why would we get so
fixated on this one part of the wall
that is dark?
And it dawned on me that to that person
or to ourselves when we're going through
these periods, that dark patch of the
wall might once have looked really
bright and filled with hope. Maybe that
patch of the wall represents something
that we once put our blinders on to
focus on really intently because at a
different point in time, it looked
really beautiful. Maybe that patch of
the wall represents a really wild and
courageous hope that we once had for our
lives.
And the reason we are so trained on it
is because it's taking us time to accept
and recognize that it's no longer
working out. And this is a metaphor that
I have turned to time and time and time
again as I've navigated my own periods
of depression in life. It's not that I'm
crazy or wrong or incorrect when I feel
so certain that everything is going to
go wrong forever if I keep walking down
this path that I'm going down. And my
job is not to argue with myself and tell
myself, "How could you possibly be so
unhappy?" or "How could you possibly
feel so disconnected?" My job is to
accept that my field of vision has
gotten trained on a particular part of
my life or my hopes or my dreams for my
own life that actually truly might need
to be
grieved. And once I can find whatever it
is that I am stuck on that needs to be
grieved and let go of naturally my field
of vision always expands beyond it and
starts seeing the rest of the wall. And
so today, what we're going to be talking
about with some more concrete examples
of this is which questions we can ask
ourselves to start surfacing things
inside of us like ideals we've been
holding on to that might no longer fit
inside of our lives. So this is the
process that I call doing an ideals
audit. I just wanted to give a kind of
sampler platter of some of the questions
that I use to start pinpointing what's
no longer working in my life so that I
can get back in reality and take stock
of all of the possibilities that exist
within my current reality. The first
question is what in my life am I holding
on to because I want to want it or
because I once really really
wholeheartedly in an embodied way did
want it but that some part of me knows I
don't actually want
anymore. And the second part of this
question is can I let that go? And the
reason why this is such an important
question to ask ourselves is because it
deliberately goes into our unconscious
minds and starts searching for areas
where we don't feel aligned anymore with
the things that we are doing that we
once felt super giga aligned with. And
the problem, the kind of trick that our
minds love to play on us is when we find
a person or a situation or a job or
whatever it is that we love, we tend to
mistakenly assume that the love we have
for that thing is located inside of the
thing. Okay? So bear with me on this. So
the cleanest example for me is that I
love being on YouTube. It is one of the
true joys of my life that I get to share
with the world. Things that I'm learning
and metabolizing that are able to help
me move through the world more
effectively. And there was a period last
year in 2024 when I was going through
some immense personal challenges. And
something I noticed was that suddenly I
was not feeling aligned with creating
the way that I usually did. So I would
sit down to film a video and it would
feel like I couldn't concentrate. My
brain was just like this tangle of wires
that would not straighten themselves out
and allow me to see clearly what I was
wanting to communicate. And I felt so
overwhelmed and stressed by this because
so much else in my life was going wrong.
And I wanted to have this one thing that
I knew I loved that I could keep with
me. And yet it was undeniable to me that
something about it was just not working
for me anymore. And when I went through
that process of doing an ideals audit
and asking myself, what do I want to
want but just truly do not want right
now? That was the thing that kept coming
up. I want to take a break from
creating. I finally allowed myself to
take a break. And I allowed myself a
long period of laying low and mourning
what was going on in my life and dealing
with the challenging situations that I
was moving through head on. And on the
other side of that, all of a sudden, I
noticed my energy returning to me. And I
noticed that I suddenly had a lot of
things I did want to talk about and
share about on YouTube again. And I
realized that allowing myself to let
this go as my ideal, as the thing that I
thought was giving my life so much
meaning allowed me to expand my
perspective and realize that YouTube is
not the thing that gives my life
meaning. What gives my life meaning is
being in the honest pursuit of truth and
the honest pursuit of understanding and
making meaning. And sometimes that
requires me to spend long periods of
time being unproductive and just
attuning to what's happening in my life
and my inner world. And if I can do
that, naturally, creativity always comes
back to me. But at the time, I was
looking at YouTube as the whole picture.
And it was never the whole picture. It
was connected to a much larger plan and
much larger ideal that I was holding for
my life, which was to be in pursuit of
that which is honest and true, and then
to share about that in whatever way
feels right, which YouTube is a
wonderful medium for, but it is far from
the whole picture. And so sometimes when
we allow ourselves to do this and to let
go of a part of our lives that we think
it makes no sense for us to not want
anymore, what ends up happening down the
line is that we find ourselves with an
expanded perspective on that thing. We
understand why it was so important to
us, what larger thing it was a part of
or an expression of. And sometimes that
larger thing requires us to let go of a
part of it in order to engage with
another part of it. And maybe the first
part comes back, maybe it doesn't. But
the point is, we have to be honest with
ourselves about what it is that we no
longer want in our lives. sometimes
without knowing if it's a permanent or a
temporary giving up of that thing in
order to expand our perspective to
realize why we wanted that thing in the
first place and what might be a more
authentic expression of it now which is
where part B of that question comes into
play right can I let it go it doesn't
have to be a permanent letting go but we
have to realize when we're no longer
feeling that connection to something
that we're going to need to allow there
to be some space at the least
between that thing and ourselves for a
while. And that connection might come
back or it might not. But the first step
is being honest enough with ourselves to
trust that sometimes we have to let
something good go even if we don't
understand why yet. Which brings us to
the second question. This one is all
about giving validity to the part of
ourselves that knows it is right about
that black square of the wall that it is
looking at. So this question is what am
I right about that I am mistaking for
the whole
picture. So sometimes when we look at
our lives, we look at these things that
we have been aiming for or orienting
ourselves around for a long time. We can
accurately pinpoint when things are just
not working out and when some goal or
some relationship or whatever it is is
actually doomed for us. And that's a
dramatic word to use, but I'm using it
because that's what it feels like. Doom
is the feeling of our entire world
collapsing. And if our entire world, as
far as we see it, is limited to this one
box on the wall, it really does feel
like doom to have that world start
collapsing.
So what we want to be aware of here at
least in our cognitive minds if we can
is that sometimes we are absolutely
right about everything that is going
wrong in our lives. We are absolutely
right about something that's going wrong
in the world and that does not mean that
that is the whole picture. It is only
the whole picture until we are able to
let go of our attachment to things going
in that particular way and recognize
what other forms our life could take
that would be just as meaningful but
they're just going to look differently
than we once hoped. This is a really
tender spot to find ourselves in because
this is how life absolutely humbles us.
If we are living fully and completely,
life will take the most wonderful things
that we have ever found away from us
ruthlessly. That is just how life works.
Nobody gets out of it without a bunch of
scars. But whether or not we get
destroyed by those losses often has to
do with the extent to which we are able
to realize that there is life beyond
them. I was actually at this event last
night that I cannot stop thinking about
where this woman stood up in the
audience. She was wanting advice from
the speaker on stage and she was talking
about how she had lost the love of her
life because he had cheated on her while
they were engaged. And I noticed really
acutely how much the rest of the room
seemed to want to instantly reframe this
for her. So people were going, you know,
if he did this, it means that you
deserve better. He's not the love of
your life. all of these things that were
essentially very well-intentioned ways
to try to make this woman feel better
and to feel empowered and good about
herself. But I could tell looking at her
face, none of this was really
registering. Because as much as the rest
of the room can stand there and tell
this woman who has just lost the love of
her life, that he was not the love of
her life and that this is not the end of
her story. Anyone who's been in that
position, who has lost something that
they so desperately loved and wanted,
knows that in that moment, none of those
empowering things feel true. What tends
to feel true is that you are in
suffering and it is so hard to find your
way out of it. And the problem is that
suffering has to be moved
through. Sometimes we have to accept
this really beautiful part of our lives
is just gone and there is nothing that
can redeem that in this moment. Yes,
maybe 5 years from now we'll meet
someone else. Maybe someday in the
future we'll look back at this and see
it as a really necessary lesson we had
to learn or hard time we had to work
through. But in the middle of it, none
of that is true yet. In the middle of
it, the thing that is true is that there
is this way we wanted our lives to go
and it did not go that way. That is the
truth. And we are still staring so
intently most of the time in these
circumstances at the way that we wanted
our lives to go and we just feel doomed.
It just feels like everything I've been
focusing on and building towards and
wanting is crumbling down. And it
doesn't matter how much other people
tell us that's not true. It is true.
What people are speaking to when they're
saying that this is going to get better
is the rest of the wall. But in order to
take our eyes off of this part of the
wall and look at the rest of it, we
first have to mourn this vision of our
lives that is no longer happening for
us. So, while everyone was giving advice
to this woman in the room last night, I
kept thinking about when my closest
friend of 15 years decided she wanted to
leave my life. And this was one of the
deepest losses I ever had to go through
in my life. It was without a close
second the most beautiful and close and
emotionally intimate relationship that I
had in my entire life. And I remember at
the time every way I tried to reframe
this friend breakup, I just could not
find a reframe that felt true. And
people would constantly offer me
reframes, right? They would try to
reframe my friend as a bad friend. I
knew in my system that wasn't true. They
had been a wonderful friend to me for 15
years. They tried to reframe this as a
necessary step in my journey. And I
would see a couple steps down the road
how this thing happening was actually a
good thing. And there was no way my
system was willing to believe that. And
the reason my system wasn't willing to
believe that was because it was not
true. I knew in my heart, in my body, in
my nervous system, in my soul, this
relationship was the best thing I ever
had. It had walked me through some of
the darkest parts of my life. It had
inspired and helped me to heal into the
person that I am today. And it had
provided this beautiful sense of
companionship and laughter and joy in my
life that almost nothing else had ever
come close to. And I knew no matter what
anybody else told me that I was losing
the best thing I had ever had. And it
wasn't until I allowed myself to really
sink into that statement and how true it
felt for me. I am losing the best thing
I've ever had and maybe the best thing
I'll ever have. It wasn't until I really
sat with those statements and allowed
them to be fully and completely true for
me that I was able to actually start
mourning that relationship and landing
back in reality and accepting this is
the reality I'm in. I'm now in a reality
where I have lost the best thing I ever
had. And the best thing that at least
from where I'm standing right now, it
feels like I will ever have. And the
thing is, as time went on, that didn't
really change. I still look back on that
friendship and I think so much of the
parts of myself that I love expressing,
the creative parts of myself, the
humorous parts of myself, the caring
parts of myself, there was just so much
of that that I felt it was so easy to
express in my relationship with this
other person. So that relationship had
an incredibly high concentration of
beautiful things and of parts of myself
that I love expressing. But as time went
on, what happened was that I found other
areas where I could express my humorous
parts and other areas of my life where I
could express my more serious parts and
other areas of my life that I could pour
that love and care into that I used to
spend a lot of time pouring into that
one relationship. And so it's not that I
found something better. It's that all of
the parts of it that were good became
kind of redistributed across the rest of
my life. And so when I look back on that
relationship now, would I say that I
found something better? No. I never
found a single relationship or a single
situation that had all of that stuff
concentrated in the same way that that
one relationship did. But are all of
those parts of me that were once alive
in that relationship still expressing
themselves in my life on a daily basis?
Yes. It's like I just kind of
redistributed that energy across a wider
network. And am I approximately equally
as happy as I was with that relationship
in my life daytoday? Approximately yes.
Yes, I still think I lost the best thing
I ever had and my life went on and it
became a different life that was
beautiful in a different way. But
telling myself that something specific
was going to come along and replace this
thing that my body and my soul just knew
was not going to happen was not working
for me. I had to get in reality. look at
that square of the wall that represented
something I once loved so so much except
that it was gone and allow myself to
zoom out and look at what was still
there in my life that allowed my life to
recalibrate to something equally as
beautiful and meaningful but very very
different. So again this question is all
about bringing our attention back to
what am I right about that I am
mistaking for the whole picture of what
matters there very often when we are
depressed when we are struggling in life
is something real that is happening that
we need to mourn and let go of. So we
are not doing oursel a service by
telling ourselves things are wonderful
when they're just not. We do ourselves a
service by recognizing that we are in
the thick of something terrible. But
that that thing is not forever going to
be our whole world. Yes, it's all
falling apart. Yes, it's all crumbling.
And later there will be something
different. But right now, our job is to
mourn whatever that thing is. To mourn
that our lives did not go the way we
wanted them to go. And until we do that,
we can't get to the next part where we
see what possibilities exist within the
reality that we are now left with. A
third question I like to ask myself when
I find myself feeling depressed or
disconnected from my feelings is the
question, what have I not said yet? And
this can apply to absolutely any area of
our lives or of our relationships. But
what this question is turning our
attention towards is what it is that is
true for us internally that we are not
being congruent about in our external
life. So when there are things that are
important to us, when there are feelings
we have that are strong, when we are
experiencing something internally that
we are not expressing externally, this
often creates non-stop resistance
between our inner worlds and our outer
worlds. And this often keeps us
low-level disregulated without
understanding
why. So asking myself the question, what
have I not said yet? often brings up the
surprising things that I realize I am
living with that I am not yet living
out. And in many cases where I have
chosen to express it anyways, I've
realized that actually what's happened
is my conception of what it's fair to do
has expanded, especially when I stay on
the page with any consequences of that
self-expression. So I'll give you an
example of this. Growing up with more
avoidant patterning, one of the prime
things that I believe was that if I
think someone did something that it was
fair or just for them to do and I had an
emotion about that thing that was
negative, my emotion must be wrong.
Because in my mind, I believe that
negative emotions only made sense if
there was some sort of injustice that
had been done to somebody. And so there
was a case in which I had a breakup and
this person and I had decided that after
a designated point of time where we
would kind of lick our wounds and take
some space from each other, we would
come back and have a conversation and
just go over the relationship and look
at whether or not we wanted to be
friends or acquaintances or whatever it
was moving forward. And when I
approached that person on the date that
we had set as the date that we would
come back and talk about things, they
told me I actually don't want to be in
contact moving forward. And I felt like
that's fair. There was no explicit
agreement that we made that said we had
to stay in contact. We had always been
clear that we were free to do whatever
we wanted with our lives and move on if
that was what we would both feel was
best after that period. And I could not
admit to myself that I was sad about
that because again my brain went if it
makes sense you must not be sad about
it. So for months and months and months
I lived with this sadness and with this
pain until I found myself getting really
depressed. And I could not figure out
why I was feeling so depressed until I
realized one day I actually feel really
sad that I never got that conversation
that I was hoping to give me some
closure around that relationship. And so
what I did was I wrote that person an
email and I just told them I feel really
sad that we never had that
conversation. And I could not believe
how much it felt like a ton of bricks
had been lifted off of me. Even though
we never really ended up having that
conversation in the way that I was
hoping. But just saying that, just being
congruent about what I felt allowed me
to get back into a position of feeling
autonomous over my emotional world.
Because I realized if this thing that
I'm feeling internally is so stuck and
so denied even by me that I won't even
allow myself to say it to another
person, I'm going to be in a constant
state of resistance to the world. And so
I told that person that I felt sad, but
I also told my friends, I told my
therapist, I told my family. I just
started living with the fact that I had
sadness that I hadn't processed about
the way that the relationship had ended.
And it turned out that was actually all
my body needed. I just needed to be seen
by my friends and by my family for what
was actually happening for me. And over
time, when I looked back on that
situation, I realized that what it was
calling me to do was expand my idea of
what was fair. Prior to that, I had
really thought in a way that was deeply
unconscious for me that if something is
fair, I must not feel emotions about it.
as in if I feel sad about something that
happened that was fair and okay, my
sadness is in some way wrong. And that
situation and being willing to be honest
with myself about it forced me to
recognize that something can be fair and
okay and I can be sad about it or in
other circumstances something can be
fair and okay and I can be angry about
it. It truly expanded my field of
awareness about how emotions work. They
are not always in relation to fairness
and justice. Sometimes they're just in
relationship to what I want and don't
want. When I want something and don't
get it, I feel sad. It doesn't matter if
it's fair that I didn't get it. I can
still just feel disappointed. Which of
course to some people is a giant duh,
that's the way the world works. But to
me was truly a monumental leap in
awareness that my emotional system could
work that way. And so sometimes just
asking ourselves that question, what
have I not said yet? Gives us
information about where our inner and
outer world is in congruent. And
generally when we make those things
congruent again, something really
interesting tends to happen. There tends
to be some shift in our awareness or our
understanding of how our emotions and
the world works that feels really
meaningful and that gets us back in
reality. What haven't I said yet? I now
ask myself this question, I kid you not,
almost every single day. Question number
four, and this one takes things in a
slightly different direction, is am I
sure that the strategy I am employing
for getting what I want is the right
strategy? A lot of the time when it
feels like we want something but we are
doomed when it comes to getting it, it's
because every strategy that we have
selected for getting that thing is
actually built on top of an unconscious
premise that is false. So a really good
example of this is insecure attachment,
right? If we have let's say an anxious
attachment style and we really want a
close connected loving relationship but
we have this unconscious belief that the
way to achieve that is to put 100% of
our focus on it. We are probably going
to struggle over and over and over again
in relationship because our strategy is
one that actually is in a lot of cases
working against our attainment of that
thing but we're not conscious of that.
Or in the other side of things, if we
air more avoidant, we might think that
the way to be in close connected
relationships with people is to be
completely and totally self-responsible
and to expect other people to be that
way as well. And then when relationship
after relationship after relationship
fails because we are doing the
self-responsible thing but our partners
for whatever reason are not, it can
start to feel like we are just doomed in
the area of love. Because as far as we
know, in either case, we are doing the
right thing. but we just aren't getting
the end goal. And so we might be looking
at the end goal saying that thing is
just impossible. It's just never going
to work out for me. Not realizing that
we have been employing a strategy all
along that was never going to be able to
get us there. So this is the really deep
stuff, right? This is where we start
doing things like shadow work and
looking at how our absolute best and
most well-intentioned efforts are
sometimes actually working against us.
And this is another really hard and
really humbling place to arrive in. But
it's the place where some of our
greatest transformations happen. So if
we are looking at this little square and
going, I still know that I for sure want
what I'm seeing in that square, the
question we might want to ask is, am I
sure? Am I truly well and completely
sure that the strategy I'm employing is
the right strategy for getting it? And
if not, now might be the time to do some
really deep digging on how I'm showing
up in relation to this thing. And in
this case, what needs to be grieved is
actually the strategy that we really
want to work. We have to grieve that I
might never get this thing that I want
if I'm only willing to approach it in
this way. And then we have to be willing
on the other side of that to expand our
skill set and our approach towards
getting what we want which very often
allows us a much more direct and easeful
pathway towards that thing once we can
get those fundamentals in place. And the
last question that I find to be
incredibly powerful when I'm moving
through a period of depression or
disconnection is what am I starting to
want even if I don't yet know how to
live in alignment with it? So, which
buds can I recognize within my own
system, within my own psyche that have
not yet blossomed, but that I'm noticing
myself wanting to start to pay attention
to, even if I'm not ready to fully
embrace and embody them yet? And what I
find about this one and the process of
mourning that's really tricky here is
that sometimes the ideal that we need to
mourn is a sense of certainty.
If I think that I am always going to
have a very clear and direct path for my
life and I'm finding that instead I feel
shrouded with doubt and uncertainty,
maybe what I'm being called to do in
this instance is to mourn the sense of
certainty that I so badly wanted for my
life and embrace that right now I am in
a state of
uncertainty. I just don't yet have a way
to see clearly what's going to happen
next or what's going to be on the other
side of all of this. And my only job is
to find a way to live inside of those
questions and really embody the not
knowing what comes next, the not knowing
where to put my attention or focus, the
not knowing what I want. Sometimes we
have to live inside that state of not
knowing in order for the next answers to
emerge out of it. And this is often the
exact spot where grief drops us off. So
maybe we've decided, okay, this narrow
square that I was placing all of my
attention on, I can now recognize is not
the whole picture, but I don't yet know
where to focus my eyes next. That can be
in and of itself a very meaningful
spiritual place to be in the embodying
of the not knowing. We are all there in
life time and time again. We call these
liinal spaces. Spaces that we have to
move through in order for our reality to
reorganize itself and for us to see in a
more clear way what we want to move
towards next. And these are frustrating
times, but they are also completely
necessary times. If we do not find a way
to kind of find our sea legs and accept
that for a while we are not going to
feel certain about what's next, we end
up just kind of grasping at these ghosts
from our past forever without ever
giving that new picture time to fully
develop itself and come into
view. And so these are five questions
that I like to sit with and meditate on
and take on walks with me when I'm going
through rough periods in life. that I
just want to offer up for anyone to use
if and when they find themselves in one
of these periods. And if there are
questions that you like to ask yourself
when you are depressed or feeling
disconnected from your life, please,
please, please drop them in the comment
section below. There are so many
brilliant perspectives that I have seen
showing up in my comment section. So, if
you have something that you can offer
someone else, a question or something
you like to sit with when you're going
through a hard time, please leave it
below. find those connection points and
that hope and that inspiration from each
other whenever you can. And as always, I
love you guys. I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other. And I will
see you back here again really soon.