Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. This month on this channel, we've
been talking about resilience. And one
of the things we've gone over is what
the difference is between trauma, so
something that causes internal
disorientation, particularly in our
nervous system, and hardship. So
hardship being a challenging
circumstance that we move through in
life that causes usually to do some form
of
self-reflection and or growth work in
order to overcome and move through. So
what I want to talk about today is what
we do when we find ourselves in those
periods of hardship. So, I had kind of
an aha moment around this when I was
reading Pete Walker's CPTTSD: From
Surviving to Thriving, which if you've
been around this channel for a while,
you know is one of my all-time favorite
books. And you don't have to have CPTSD
to relate to what I'm going to say next.
But I remember picking up this book and
having this kind of fantasy that reading
it and absorbing everything in it and in
particular doing all the healing work
that was required of me would get me to
a place where I would always be thriving
and never just surviving again. And I do
actually think that there's a part of
the book that specifically addresses the
fact that to be healed does not mean
that you live in a perpetual state of
thriving. It means that you're able to
switch back and forth between periods of
thriving and surviving well. And
unfortunately, this turned out to be
very true of life. No matter how much
healing work I did, hard times still
came up. Periods of hardship and
external challenges still arrived into
my life. But I do like to think that
I've gotten pretty good at accepting
those periods and moving through them as
effectively as possible. And when I say
as effectively as possible, I mean in
the most honest and direct way possible.
So in this video, that's exactly what
we're going to talk about. What to do if
you find yourself in a period where you
are not thriving. And in fact, you need
to focus for a while on just surviving
and getting through. Essentially, what
we're talking about today is how to
suffer well. The first thing that I
personally try to focus on anytime I
notice that my life is not going the way
that I've wanted it to or some change is
coming and forcing itself upon me that I
do not want is to identify that I am in
a period of surviving rather than
thriving and try to minimize the time
that I am spending in resistance of that
fact. Now, there are always going to be
periods of our lives where things happen
and we're like, uh, this isn't quite the
way I want things to be going. And
spending a little bit of time in
resistance of those things, pushing back
against them, seeing if we can actually
not go into that situation that we don't
want to happen can actually be fruitful,
right? So, a lot of the time this is an
exit route. But sometimes some form of
challenge or strife arrives in our lives
in a way that is just proving itself to
be persistent and there has to be a
point where we reckon with that cleanly
and directly and accept for ourselves
right now. I am in the middle of a
challenging period. I am going through
something regardless of how much I do
not want to be going through it. And so
it might be time to manage my own
expectations. When I am thriving and
full of energy and firing on all
cylinders or even just in a period of
relative calm and stability, there's a
lot of things I can do and a lot of ways
I can operate that are just not quite as
accessible to me when the stakes of my
life are down. And I generally find when
I'm going through it in whatever
capacity, this step alone is the single
most defining one of whether I'm going
to make it through this period in a way
that feels meaningful and growth
oriented or not. Because this first step
is the step of surrender, accepting
something that I do not want to be
happening is happening and I'm going to
have to adjust to that in some way or
another whether I want to or not. So
this is our decision, however
reluctantly, to welcome in the challenge
that has happened upon us and accept
that we are going to be in relationship
with it for some time moving forward.
The reason that this is important is
because when bad things happen to us and
we do not adjust our expectations for
ourselves and what we are going to be
capable of as we move through it, we end
up with a lot of secondary problems like
shame and constantly belittling
ourselves or being down on ourselves for
not being able to do what we're normally
doing or burnout if we just keep pushing
ourselves to meet the same standards
that we normally meet under different
circumstances. So this is about being
real with ourselves about what is
happening and about the fact that we are
going to have to make some adjustments
if we want to move through it well.
Which leads us to step two. Step two for
navigating hardship and this is one that
I've been honing for myself over a
number of years is have an emergency
response system already in place. So
what does that mean? An emergency
response system is essentially a set of
expectations you will have for yourself
that are different for when you are
moving through a hard time than from
when you are in periods of stability and
ease. The way we develop this emergency
response system is by reflecting on
other challenging times we've moved
through in life and picking out what
really helped us authentically navigate
through those well versus what simply
drained our energy and worked against
us. So, we want to identify a couple of
things. One, what are our bare minimum
standards for ourselves and our lives?
So, the things that we absolutely do not
want to let drop at any cost. This can
be something like if you are a parent,
caring for your child, making sure that
they are fed and getting sleep and going
to school on time. If you are not a
parent, it can be things like taking
basic care of yourself. Making sure that
you do not get fired during a period of
challenge might be something that's a
priority to you. And it might not be
also but it might be. So things like
that what are our very basic survival
needs that we just need to make sure we
are attending to even if we cannot
attend to anything else right now. So
something that I like to employ during
periods of struggling is the one thing a
day principle. I try to pick only one
task a day to do. Some days that's
getting to work. Other days that's
getting exercise. Other days it's
cooking one healthy meal. But as soon as
I feel overwhelmed and in over my head
in some major way in life, I try to boil
each day down to just one most crucial
thing that has to happen that day and
allow myself to consider it enough if I
have only done that. And that's usually
my response system to something quite
intense like depression. But other
things we want to look at during this
step are just things like what can we be
a little bit less strict with ourselves
about right now? Not because we want our
whole lives to go to hell, but because
there might be things that we are
dayto-day spending a lot of energy and
willpower on that we actually kind of
need some of that energy and willpower
back from right now. So, can I ease up a
little bit on some of these commitments
that in the face of this new challenge
are just not as important for me to
focus on right now? So, where can I gain
some of my own time and energy back from
the areas that are not that important to
me when I'm in a state of
distress? And on the flip side, where
might I need to be a little bit more
strict with myself right now? So, when
I'm really struggling, I try to be
stricter than average with myself in
areas like getting enough social
interaction, going outside every day,
getting enough rest. So doing things
that under normal circumstances we might
be able to kind of power through without
but when the stakes are really down we
actually need to attend to heavily. So
this is going to look totally different
person to person and it's probably also
going to look different for you crisis
to crisis based on what's happening in
your life at any given point in time.
But just developing a bit of an idea of
where you might be able to naturally
relax some of the standards that you
normally hold yourself up to in order to
give yourself more energy back and which
resources socially, financially or
otherwise exist in your life that you
might be able to withdraw from a little
bit more heavily during these periods is
going to give you a sense of normaly.
There's a quote that I usually hear
applied to things like military
training, but I think it applies in lots
of areas of life that goes, "We do not
rise to the level of our expectations.
We fall to the level of our training."
And I think that that is so relevant for
moving through hard times in our lives.
When we prepare for them, when we expect
that they are going to come at some time
or another, and we develop plans and
systems that we can put in place as soon
as we realize they're happening, it
takes a humongous amount of mental load
off of our plate. So, we have more time
and energy available to us to simply
respond to what is happening. And so,
those systems are things we might just
want to get thinking about when we are
not struggling so that we have plans in
place for what we can do once we are.
Third thing to focus on when going
through a hardship is learning to accept
that some things simply cannot be
understood or reworked until we have
moved through them because the
perspective that we often so direly want
can only come from getting some distance
from the experience itself. So, this
lesson is going to be particularly
pertinent for those of you who, like
myself, really like to hinge onto the
idea of if I can only understand
something, everything will be okay. Some
periods of our lives are just periods
where things are falling apart and we
don't yet have a clear sense of what is
going to come next. I was actually
thinking about this this past winter
because I got hit with the flu, like a
really bad, totally knocked me out for
weeks flu. And the thing about having a
virus like that in your system is that
you just have to wait it out. Yes, you
can take care of yourself as well as you
possibly can. Yes, you can make sure
that you're getting enough rest and
you're getting enough fluids and all of
that good stuff, but at the end of the
day, sometimes we just have to endure
things until they work their way out of
our system. And the same is true of many
life scenarios. many things that will
later on absolutely become part of the
story that you tell yourself about your
life that you will find ways to make
sense of and grapple with and accept
while we are moving through them. We
just cannot possibly have that
perspective on yet. And so the things
that become really important during
those periods are just having realistic
expectations for ourselves, compassion
for ourselves, care for ourselves and
our lives and the things that matter to
us that we do still have, and the
ability to just keep enduring until we
can get to the place where it will
someday all make sense in retrospect. So
the point here is that if we want to be
healthy human beings, we sometimes just
have to let life humble us. And it will.
We cannot expect every experience we go
through to be this immediate humongous
learning opportunity or thing that we
can reframe for the better. Sometimes we
just have to take the L, let life kind
of pummel us for a little bit and then
wait for the authentic signals in our
bodies to tell us when it's time to get
back up and fight again. I went through
this period last year where after
resisting and resisting and resisting
all of these different ways in which
life was just kind of dealing me blows.
I eventually went I think the only move
I have here is to just get on my knees
spiritually and emotionally and accept
that I don't know what's coming next. I
hope it's better than this. But right
now all I can do is move through this
and hope that there's something better
on the other side of it eventually. And
of course there always is. Which brings
us to step four. Once we have accepted
we are in the thick of something, we
have our emergency responses in place,
we have the opportunity to start
examining some of the reasons why we may
have ended up here. So often I find that
when I'm going through a really
challenging period that I have a lot of
resistance to, it's often because I'm
holding on to some ideal or some hope
that actually doesn't really make sense
anymore. So something I like to talk
about is doing an ideals audit when we
are going through it in life and really
examining what are my values? What am I
pushing myself towards and do I still
feel truly aligned with all of those
things? Sometimes when we're
experiencing a lot of resistance in a
way that does not feel like it's growing
us in our lives, it's because actually
we're pursuing old passions or old goals
or old ways of doing things that no
longer really align with who we are now.
So periods of hardship or challenge can
be really good opportunities to check in
with ourselves and ask, is there
anything that my body is just begging me
to let go of? Is there a relationship or
a scenario that genuinely just needs to
be grieved and moved on from in my life?
And if so, now might be the time to
attend to that and to let there be a
little bit of a void before something
new comes in to take its place. You're
going through it anyways, right? If you
are in a pit of despair, might as well
leave some things that have expired in
your life down there so that your climb
is a lot lighter on the way back out.
Fifth thing that I think is incredibly
important anytime we are moving through
a period of hardship particularly when
we are in the middle stages where not a
lot is making sense to us where it just
feels like things we care about are
falling apart and nothing new is
arriving to take their place yet. This
more than any other time in our lives is
the time to stay super attuned to
whatever feels right and wrong in our
lives. So even if we are feeling very
depressed or very alone or very
hopeless, where can we nonetheless
perceive our bodies in very subtle ways
saying yes to anything, however
disconnected from our overall goals and
plans for our lives. So for example,
this past winter, I went through a
really challenging period where I was
grappling with a lot of loss and the
only thing my body wanted to do, the
only thing was write and walk. That was
it. And so I decided at some point after
a long period of resistance, you know
what? I'm going to give myself one
month, which I luckily could do as a
self-employed person, to only listen to
what my body wants. And what my body
ended up doing was walking for several
hours a day and working on a writing
project for several hours a day. And the
writing project, at least thus far,
didn't go anywhere. I never published
it. But I was very surprised to find
that almost every day, whatever came up
in my writing project was something that
needed to be processed about the period
of time that I was going through. So my
body knew I needed time and movement and
space to make sense of my experiences in
a way that would allow me to integrate
them and actually move into the next
stage of my life, having grieved the
things that needed to be grieved. But
for you, it might not be writing or
walking that your body needs. It might
be something totally different, but this
is the time to just get as quiet with
ourselves as we possibly can. And listen
to any subtle nos or yeses that your
body might be pummeling you with. Now
more than ever, it's likely time to take
those things seriously and follow those
tiny threads of aliveness, however small
and however nonsensical, to where they
want to go. Because this is the very
thing that is going to connect you with
the energy you need to start rebuilding
your life in a new way or reconnecting
with the things that matter to you in a
new way. All hardships, if we actually
are able to surrender to them, change us
and give us new ways of relating to the
world and ourselves and other people on
the other side of them. Which leads us
to the sixth and penultimate thing that
I want to talk about when it comes to
going through a hard time, which is
recognize any opportunity that you do
have now to invest in yourself. So, this
is an adage that I love so much that I
recently picked up from the author
Brianna Wuest who has a ton of amazing
books. I was at an event for her last
book tour where she was saying, "When
the stakes are down in life, kind of
think of it like the stock market. We
sell when it's high, we invest when it's
low. So, when we are at our lowest, when
life has already knocked us off all of
the pedestals we were standing on, now
is the time to think about, are there
changes I want to make that I haven't
bothered to spend the time or energy on
when my life was going better? Now is
probably a great time to invest in
myself in new ways and start charting
the course towards where I want to go in
life next. And again, this can only
happen after a period of allowing
ourselves to be humbled by life, to
adapt to our circumstances, to listen to
ourselves and what's important to us
now. And then we get to be at choice
about where we start heading next. And
again, this is a really great
opportunity to explore new areas that we
may have been neglecting when we were
busy with our lives going well. Maybe we
can use some of that extra time and
energy we've cleared out for ourselves
to try out a new passion project or
follow a new hobby or have some of those
hard conversations that we've been
putting off for a really long time. So,
how do we actually use this period of
hardship as an opportunity to capitalize
on some of the areas that we generally
leave neglected in favor of supporting
the parts of our lives that are
thriving. This is the beginning of
stepping into that new future that once
you follow it long enough down a
particular path is eventually going to
give you the perspective you need to
make sense of this time and what you
were able to take out of it. Which leads
us to the last step. Step seven, listen
to your body's cues to get back to life.
So when we get good at things like
surrendering to life and grieving things
that are gone and moving through our
pain effectively and with presence and
awareness, what we also want to be
paying attention to is when is this
period of suffering letting us know that
it wants to be over. So just as there is
a time to be humbled, there is also a
time to stand up and start facing the
fire. And in order to figure out when
that time is, we have to be really
honest with ourselves. So, one of my
favorite exchanges that I ever saw on
Twitter was someone talking about
intuitive eating and they were saying,
"If I did intuitive eating," so this
kind of dietary philosophy that focuses
on following what your body naturally
and instinctively wants to eat. They
were saying, "If I did that, I would
just eat pizza all the time. This makes
no sense." And someone responded saying,
"If you are only listening to your
cravings for junk food or sugary stuff,
you're not actually practicing intuitive
eating because the body is also
constantly signaling you towards the
healthy things that it wants. And you
have to be paying equal attention to
those as you are to the sugary cravings
if you want to be in balance." And this
is the exact attitude that I think we
need to take towards our mental health
and our spiritual and emotional health
as well. We need to know when it's time
to lie down and accept the losses in
life. But we also have to listen to our
bodies and notice when what they are
craving is for us to stand up, practice
courage, and start charting a new course
in some direction. And we have to be
really honest with ourselves about when
it feels like it is authentically time
to do each one. So if you have gone
through a long period of struggle but
you're starting to feel positivity and
excitement and hope return to your
worldview, engage with those things.
Follow them. Go where they are trying to
lead you because those feelings are
indicative of the natural return to life
that happens after we have gone through
authentic grief. And those are just as
real and valuable parts of the human
experience as any of it. We got to
listen to the body's signals that it's
time to go into a period of surviving
and listen to the calls that indicate to
us that it's time to go back into a
period of thriving all the
same. All right, that's all I'm going to
say for today on this topic, but as
always, any thoughts, comments,
perspectives, any pieces of advice that
you would love to share with others
about what you do when you are in these
periods of just needing to get through
something in life, please leave in the
comments section below. As always, I
love you guys. I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other and I will
see you back here again really soon.
[Music]