Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. For the past month and a half on
this channel, we've been talking about
resilience. And today in particular, I
want to talk about the concept of
distress tolerance. Now, this is a term
that comes from the field of DBT or
dialectical behavioral therapy. And I
want to make clear right off the get- go
that this is not a field that I am
trained in. So, what this video is not
going to be about is specific DBT
skills. Okay? And the reason this video
is not going to be about that is because
there is already a wide plethora of
resources available online. So if what
you are looking for is skills to help
you return to regulation in the moments
when you are incredibly disregulated and
you want to use DBT to do that, I
encourage you to go check out what
resources you can find online for that.
I know they also have awesome workbooks
for it. But what we are going to be
talking about today is something
slightly different which is using this
concept of distress tolerance. So the
ability to be present with challenging
emotional states as something that you
can work on proactively in order to
expand your comfort zone. Now the first
thing I want to talk about is the
difference between distress and
discomfort. When we can tolerate
discomfort well, essentially what that
means is that we can be present with
uncomfortable or hard emotions and
feelings in our body that aren't
necessarily pleasant without going into
one of our four F responses. So the four
F responses are fight, flight, freeze,
and fawn. Fight is essentially when our
bodies are getting pumped with
adrenaline and we believe that we have
to defend ourselves at any cost. Flight
is when we believe that we absolutely
must escape a situation, either
literally or mentally or emotionally.
Freeze is when our systems feel
immobilized and like it's not safe to
make a move in any direction until we
can stop and figure out exactly what's
going on. And fawn is a state in which
we are automatically deferring to the
wants or needs of other people without
being able to access or get clear on
what our own are. Now what I want to
make clear is that these are all highly
adaptive things in the right situations.
So in situations where you are genuinely
under threat, these are good responses
for the body to have because essentially
what they do is they shut down that part
of the mind that is trying to reason and
make sense of the situation and they
react based on pure instinct. Again,
this is very useful in the right
situations. The problem is that if one
of these four F responses repeatedly
comes online for us in situations where
we are not genuinely under threat, those
responses tend to create a lot of
problems for us that don't need to exist
because maybe we are now chronically
avoiding situations that it would be
better for us to be present with and
deal with head on. Or maybe we are
constantly fighting back against things
that it would actually be more adaptive
for us to once again just be present and
work through calmly. Maybe we are
freezing and shutting down in situations
where actually help would be available
to us if we knew how to look for and
source it. Or maybe we're fawning in
situations and assuming that we need to
appease another person when in fact that
person would actually be a safe person
for us to express our genuine
preferences to. So essentially, I'm
defining distress in this video as any
emotional state that feels intolerable
for us and flips us into one of those 4F
responses
unconsciously. And discomfort, I'm
defining as an emotional state that is
uncomfortable and unpleasant in most
cases, but that we are able to stay
present with and we are able to make
conscious choices around how we want to
deal with it. So once again, if you're
in a situation that is genuinely bad for
you, you can still deal with it from a
place of discomfort because when you're
in a state of discomfort, you are still
able to recognize things like I don't
like the way I'm being spoken to or I
feel like a lot of pressure is being
applied on me that I don't like. So
again, this is not about making the
intolerable tolerable. It is about
choosing which situations we would like
to increase our capacity to have
conscious choice around and working
specifically on building our muscles in
those areas. So some examples of areas
where we might want to build up our
distress tolerance can essentially be
found in anything that we kind of think
would be good for us but that we are
very afraid of so we avoid like the
plague. So attachment strategies give
really good examples of this. If we air
more anxious, it might be really hard
for us to leave relationships that we
know are not working anymore or that are
bad for us because we might have a
paralyzing fear of being alone and
without support. And so you might
identify an area where you want to build
your distress tolerance. So an area
where you want to transmute that
distress into discomfort as learning to
be single or to be alone without
panicking at the very thought of
experiencing that discomfort because
it's the fear of the discomfort itself
that often keeps us stuck in bad
situations. An example of this is I used
to be very afraid of flying. And so in
my mid20s I went to a therapist to try
to start working with this fear. And one
of the questions they asked me
was,"Well, are you afraid of dying?" And
I thought about it and I went, "You know
what? I'm not actually. Every day I get
in cars. I know that cars are very
liable to crash and I actually don't
really have a fear of dying in a car
accident. I don't have a fear of dying
in a lot of circumstances because I
figure that once I'm dead, I won't
really know the difference. But I do
have a fear of getting on planes." And I
realized that what I was actually afraid
of was not dying on the plane. It was
that I had this idea in my head of what
it would feel like to realize my plane
was crashing. And I was so afraid of the
distress that I imagined I would feel in
that instance that I would avoid flying
altogether because the
anticipation of that distress was what I
was actually afraid of. Okay, so I'm
going to break that down again. It's
often the fear of being in distress that
we are afraid of and that keeps us stuck
in bad situations. So when I was unable
to get on an airplane, not because I
actually thought my life was going to
end, but because I knew that from the
moment I booked the flight, I would
spend months replaying in my head the 30
to 60 seconds of panic I imagined I
would feel as the plane went down. I
started wanting to avoid flying
altogether because I was so afraid of
anticipating distress. And again, we can
parallel this to all sorts of things. A
lot of us stay in bad situations because
we are afraid of the distress that we
might encounter if we were to leave them
and be forced to deal with things like
being on our own. An example from the
more avoidant side of the spectrum. Very
often avoidance are criticized for being
afraid of commitment. I personally do
not believe that anybody is afraid of
commitment as a construct. But what's
happening for a lot of avoidance is that
they recognize on a sematic level that
when they get into relationships, they
tend to feel a lot of pressure that is
taxing on the nervous system. And it's
not that they are afraid necessarily of
committing to a human being. It's that
there is this unconscious fear of having
to live perpetually in that state of
distress. And so this flight response,
this backing away and not wanting to get
too close to people often functions as a
protective mechanism for avoiding the
chronic stress that comes online when
they find themselves in mutually
dependent relationships. So there is an
unconscious state of distress happening
and when we can learn to transform
distress into discomfort. So to make
conscious for ourselves what the body is
responding to in the moments where one
of our 4F responses comes online and
then learning to stay present and
attuned to that thing without needing to
automatically escape that feeling.
That's when we develop the skill of
adapting ourselves to new situations
that we might want to choose to adapt
ourselves to. So there are a couple ways
of working on distress tolerance. One
way is to develop regulation strategies
that you can pull out in a moment of
distress. And this is what the field of
DBT focuses on. I'm just going to be
completely honest and say the reason why
I'm making this video is because that
just doesn't work for me. It has almost
always been very challenging for me to
work on distress only in the moments
when it's present for me. And it has
helped me immensely to work on building
my distress tolerance in between moments
of distress so that my body and my
nervous system had a blueprint it could
fall back on in those moments for how to
deal with them. So we're going to talk
about how to do that. And there are
three cardinal rules that I think it's
really important to internalize when we
start working with distress tolerance.
The first rule is that the body and the
brain learn differently. So the brain
learns things through grasping concepts.
We generally say that we know something
or that we understand something when we
are able to explain it in words and when
we have a kind of clear and coherent
idea of it inside of our heads. But this
is very differently than how the body
learns. The body learns through
experience. So the body knows something
is true when it has experienced it and
it has formed a memory of that
experience that lives again in the
nervous system. So a big mistake that a
lot of us make when we're trying to work
with things like trauma or our
physiological preferences is that we
think just frontloading our brains with
information will get us to the point
where our body now trusts that it's safe
to behave differently. And what I want
to make clear is that I'm not knocking
the conscious way of learning. The mind
is very important for things like
discernment and figuring out where we
even need to do this work in the first
place. But the body has to learn through
experience. So if we want to build up
our distress tolerance, we cannot simply
frontload our brain with a bunch of
information about triggers and the
nervous system and how this all works.
We have to actually go put ourselves in
situations where we are making the
choice to react differently than we have
in the past. And then we have to stay
present and associated for long enough
that our body is able to log the
experience as a memory of a time when we
did something and stayed safe. And the
thing that's really important to
remember here is that we can be in a
flight response mentally. So if I have a
phobia of flying and I force myself to
get on a 100 airplanes, if I am just
dissociating through the entire
experience, my body is not going to log
that flight as a memory of a time when I
was safe because I was not relaxing into
the experience and allowing myself to
actually log in my body. I am safe here.
Okay. Now I want to once again be clear.
Safe does not mean I feel good. Safe
does not mean I like this environment.
Safe just means I am able to relax and
be present and at choice about how I'm
responding without my life being in
danger. So our bodies learn distress
tolerance not through the mind but
through the nervous system. And that's
just one of the cardinal rules we're
going to keep in mind as we talk about
how to do the process of building this
tolerance. The next cardinal rule is
that we have to meet our bodies and our
nervous systems where they are at not
where we think they should be at
otherwise this skill never gets built.
So if we think it is absolutely
ridiculous that we are afraid of
something or if we think that we
absolutely should be able to be present
with distress in X Y or Z scenario. If
our body does not agree, nothing else
matters. Because our body does not trust
the conscious mind's judgment. It trusts
its own judgment. I can recognize with
my conscious mind that flying is
statistically not that dangerous. Or
that telling someone you're upset with
them or that advocating for your needs
in a relationship and setting a boundary
with someone is probably not that
dangerous or that being single is not
that dangerous. But we have to meet our
bodies where they are at and where their
belief system lies in order to begin
working on this. Otherwise, what's going
to happen is as soon as you're in a
situation where your conscious mind says
this is safe and your body says no, it's
not, your body is going to hit the
override switch on your conscious mind
and it is going to react based on
instinct. So, we have to be willing to
start building distress tolerance. not
where we think it's rational to, but by
taking cues from our body and the things
that we systematically avoid to get
clear on what our bodies believe is safe
versus nonsafe and taking that
seriously, even if it feels ridiculous
to our conscious minds. And the third
thing to keep in mind when working on
building distress tolerance is that we
need to practice wise discernment about
what we are adapting ourselves to. So, I
can use the skill of distress tolerance
to train my nervous system to feel
totally zened out when a grizzly bear is
attacking me. But if I end up in that
situation and practice that skill, I'm
probably going to end up dead. And so,
what we want to do here is use the
conscious mind to determine for
ourselves, what would I like to be more
at choice about in my life? What are
some areas where I see myself getting
triggered and have identified as an area
that I would like to be able to handle
from a non-triggered state? Not because
I want to just take whatever is
happening lying down, but because I want
to be able to respond from the wisest
part of myself. So, this is not about
learning to tolerate the intolerable. It
is about learning to be more present
with and at choice about all of the
circumstances of our lives because we
are marrying the cognition of the mind
with the wisdom of the nervous system
and getting them to start working
together. So, we're going to talk a
little bit about how to do this. And I
want us to think of this as kind of like
going to the gym and just building this
muscle so that when the time comes to
lift up something important, you are
pre-trained. You have given your nervous
system enough experiences of sitting
with emotions that used to flip you into
a distress state in a safe context that
you now have bodybased memories of how
to be with that distress. And I'll give
more examples of what that looks like as
we go through. The first step in working
with distress tolerance is pinpointing
what internal state we are afraid of
encountering and then finding
environments we can practice being in
that state within that are contained.
And what contained means in this context
is an environment where you know what is
going to happen. So we're going to take
this back and move slowly through this.
In order to figure out what internal
body state you are afraid of, you
generally have to look at what you
chronically avoid in your life. So this
requires us developing an understanding
of the fact that what we are afraid of
is generally not located inside of the
thing that we are avoiding. It is
located inside of us. We are afraid of
getting trapped in a physiological state
that feels intolerably distressing. So
if I imagine myself, let's say being
alone or setting a boundary with someone
or getting on an airplane, what is it
that I'm imagining my physical state
would be? My emotional state would be.
And that is likely what needs to get
worked with, our ability to tolerate
that state. And when we can do this, we
learn that it's not the things in our
environment we're afraid of. It's our
inability to tolerate the feelings that
come up in our bodies and our awareness
when we interact with those things. And
so building distress tolerance is about
learning to tolerate those emotions and
those physiological experiences well
enough to be at choice with how we
interact with the object. So again, step
one is about figuring out what internal
state we are so afraid of encountering
that we feel like we don't know how to
tolerate and then putting ourselves in
environments that are well contained. So
generally what this means is an
environment where you have someone like
a therapist, a coach, a support group
who is able to provide you with a sense
of certainty around what will definitely
happen if you go into that state. So, an
example, I've talked on this channel
before about doing the practice of
radical honesty in my attachment healing
work. And a big part of radical honesty
involves learning to stay associated to
anger. So, when you go into a radical
honesty workshop, a lot of what happens
is that people are encouraged to express
anger, but also to stay present with
what is happening for them when they are
in anger. So, it's not about unleashing
on another person and telling them
everything you hate about them. It's
about noticing I'm really angry and I
can tell people that I'm really angry
and I'm going to keep my awareness on
what is happening for me
physiologically. My face is getting
flushed or my hands want to curl into
fists or my face is scrunching up in a
certain way. Right? And you're
encouraged to pay attention to your body
and what is happening physiologically
when you are in an angry state.
and getting routinely coached through a
state of anger and learning I can go
into anger without being in danger
because there was a coach who was there
helping me stay present and associated
to the moment while I was in anger
changed my relationship with it
forever. The same kind of thing happened
to me once when I had a very strong
abandonment trigger go off. So, I had a
situation where in a long-term romantic
relationship, I had something happen
that hardcore triggered a really deeply
buried fear of abandonment. And as soon
as this happened, at this point, I was
pretty aware of what a trigger felt like
in my body. So, I went and I asked my
therapist if they would be available for
kind of an emergency call. And luckily,
they were. And I will never forget
sitting down with my therapist for that
session and them saying to me, "Hey,
it's really clear to me you're in the
middle of a trigger. Do you want to try
co-regulating through it and learning
that you can come down from this
trigger? And I had built enough
relational trust with this person to
know that they were not going to take
advantage of anything I said or did in a
triggered state. And my therapist, who
also luckily was very traumainformed and
very good with somatic modalities,
helped me stay very aware of what was
happening in my body and my environment
while I was in the trigger as well as
while I was coming down from it. And
this ability to stay present with where
we are, what's going on around us, and
what's happening in our bodies as we are
working through these distressing states
is crucial for giving our bodies the
message that we can stay associated and
present in these states and still
survive them and in a lot of cases end
up making better choices because we have
been able to stay present. And so the
work on this step actually starts long
before the first time a trigger goes off
within a contained environment. This
step starts when we begin to identify
for ourselves environments where it
might someday be safe to do that. So for
myself, I worked with my therapist for
years before I ever came to that
therapist in a triggered state and
trusted that I would be guided through
it effectively. I went to multiple
radical honesty workshops and watched
lots of people get coached through anger
before my body started to believe this
is a safe place to express anger and be
held in it. I went to a lot of 12step
groups. I used to go to ACA pretty
regularly and watched a lot of people do
very vulnerable shares and watched how
nobody was allowed to ridicule them or
even respond to what they were sharing
before I felt comfortable practicing
sharing more vulnerable things myself.
So step one is figuring out where do I
want to build this distress tolerance
and where can I find a contained
environment that I can go to to practice
that skill within. And then we generally
have to go put ourselves in that
environment and give our bodies proof by
watching other people do this or by
building a therapeutic relationship that
involves trust that when it's time to
show up in that state in that
environment, we are probably going to be
safe. So this is the process of our body
learning to trust certain select
environments as safe which builds up to
the body trusting the conscious mind in
the instances where we go hey I am going
to try to go into this emotional state
in this context because I've seen what
will happen if I do pinpointing the
inner state we want to work on finding
the environments that can contain them
giving our bodies proof by being present
in those environments that those things
will be contained and then trying it out
for ourselves. That is all step one in
learning to build emotional distress
tolerance. Step two is designing
self-contained spaces for dealing with
our challenging emotions. So another
example of this is I used to immensely
struggle with sadness. My body would
automatically regulate me out of the
emotion of sadness because again sadness
is often about being in despair and
being in a state where you are
recognizing your own helplessness. which
because of my own early patterning was
something my body thought I would die if
I were to do. And so at the point in my
life where I was doing a lot of this
emotional work and working on building
up my tolerance to be present with
different emotions, I was also going
through the breakup of a long-term
relationship.
And something I noticed one day as I was
sitting in my room, I was living in
Colorado at the time, was that a song
came on that reminded me of my exartner
and I felt the tiniest twinge of
sadness, which is a feeling that
historically my body would take me
immediately out of. I would go right
into a mental flight response and start
thinking about something really positive
and exciting in the future and I would
regulate myself out of that state of
sadness. And I went, you know what? What
if I actually stay with this? What if I
give myself five minutes to practice
being with this sadness? What if I
restart this song that I'm listening to
that's reminding me of my ex and
actually just try if I can to really
sink into that experience and notice
what happens in my body if I just let
myself be sad on the condition that when
this song is over I'm going to go
outside and I'm going to go for a hike
because I knew without a shadow of a
doubt that I was going to feel
differently when I was outside hiking
and I was getting endorphins pumping
through my system and looking at
beautiful views. And so I went, what if
I created an environment for myself
where similar to in a workshop, I knew
that after I sunk into this feeling, I
was then going to do something that was
going to take me out of it. Because
generally my fear of going into feelings
of sadness or helplessness were around
the fact that I thought they were going
to last forever because I didn't know
how to take myself out of those states.
I had never learned to go into them for
long enough to find my way back out. And
so I created an experiment where I would
listen to the full song, actually try to
amplify and really be present with the
body sensations of sadness and loss and
then take myself out of it
deliberately. And it worked surprisingly
well. And so the next day I decided,
what if I recreate this on purpose? What
if I spend 20 minutes today really
trying to be with my experience of loss
and pain and sadness? And then I go on a
hike. And the reason why that second
part is really important was because I
was teaching my body, not my mind, my
body by giving it a new experience that
if you go into sadness, you will come
out of it. And I did this day after day
after day for a couple of weeks. And
then something really interesting
happened to me. One night, I was walking
home late at night from my co-working
space and I was thinking about another
situation in my life. not the breakup,
but just another thing that I was going
through that felt challenging. And I
noticed my body response of sadness
spontaneously coming online, which again
was almost unheard of for me. And I
noticed I was at this very particular
choice point because I couldn't take
myself hiking if I went into the sadness
afterwards because it was like 10:00 at
night. And so I went, I'm just going to
try out going into this feeling without
knowing when it's going to end. And I'm
going to see what happens. And so I
walked home and I stayed really present
with my physiological state with my
heavy eyelids and my limbs that felt
heavy and kind of like I was dragging
myself through the street. And I allowed
myself to go to sleep in that state. And
I woke up feeling incredibly renewed,
like I had just had a long cry, even
though I hadn't actually cried. But I
had learned a really important lesson in
my body, which is that sadness passes
and it's safe to go into it. And the way
I learned that lesson was by designing
an experience for myself where it was
definitely true and practicing that
experience over and over and over again
until my body had a memory of it that it
could trust. It's not enough to know
that sadness ends. We have to give our
bodies the experience of going into
sadness and having it end, of going into
anger and having it end, of going into
aloneeness or even things like true
abandonment and recognizing that we do
not die by staying associated with that
experience until we reach the end of the
stress cycle and recognize I am safe.
Okay, so this step is all about learning
to contain environments for ourselves so
that after we have learned in a safe
environment how to practice this skill,
we can now start doing it at home. And
the third and last step of this process
is really just that it is noticing that
we are now able to experience more
spontaneous emotion and we have a
framework for how to be present with
those emotions without flipping into one
of our four F responses.
So again, when I'm sad about something,
it doesn't mean that I'm going to allow
the sadness to go on forever. What it
means is that I'm going to be present
with the sadness. I'm not going to freak
out that it's happening in my body, and
so I'm actually going to be able to stay
on the page with it for long enough to
listen to what it is trying to tell me.
Often sadness means that there's
something we need to let go of, or
there's something that's not working for
us anymore. And if we never listen to
that, we never internalize that. and
make the changes that we need to make in
our lives. Same goes with anger. Anger
is often a really good indication that
we need to be setting a boundary or
saying no to something. And if we are
never present with anger for long enough
to do that, one of two things starts
happening. We either live with no
boundaries or we start trying to get
other people to enforce our boundaries
for us and basically start outsourcing
all of our self-p protection. So the
idea of working intentionally and
proactively with distress tolerance is
that we have the capacity to recognize
what we are avoiding in our external
world. Recognize that what we are
actually afraid of is what will happen
inside of our own minds, bodies and
systems if we encounter that thing. And
then we can start working with that
feeling in environments that are safe
and developmentally appropriate. So
again that cardinal rule you have to
meet your body where your body is at or
else you will overload it and flip into
distress. And through that process we
can learn to transform distress into
discomfort and we can be present enough
with that discomfort to start making
wiser choices about how we handle our
lives because we are able to actually
listen to the wisdom of what our
emotions are trying to tell us.
All right, this has been a long video,
so I'm going to leave it at that for
today. But as always, any questions,
anything you have coming up for you as
you go through this video, please leave
them in the comments section below. I
love you guys. I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other, and I will
see you back here again really soon.
[Music]