Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. This month on this channel, we've
been talking about resilience. And in a
lot of ways, what it means to be
emotionally mature is to have resilience
when it comes to your own self-concept.
So, the ability to show up as you are in
a variety of different circumstances and
to be fluid and adaptable enough in your
self-concept to be able to respond
appropriately to a wide variety of
situations. So maturity for myself was a
really difficult concept to wrap my head
around when I started intentionally
pursuing it. I used to think of maturity
as basically someone who was just well
adapted to the adult world. So someone
who knew how to be on time and respect
their responsibilities and navigate
through challenging interpersonal
situations well. But the more in touch
with myself I got as I was going through
the attachment healing process, the more
I realized that it's very easy and
tempting to perform maturity instead of
actually embodying it. So today, what
we're going to be talking about largely
is why we cannot actually be mature,
well-rounded human beings unless and
until we are in touch with our own
authenticity. So we're going to go over
five things that tend to get mistaken on
the surface for maturity.
some of the tells that someone might be
practicing that thing without having
their authentic needs, wants, and
preferences integrated into it and what
needs to happen instead in order for
that sense of maturity, whether it's
ours or someone else's, to be more
resilient across a wide variety of
situations. So in the healing process, I
had to take my definition of maturity,
which was some version of navigating the
world and relationships well, and I had
to add something to the end of it, which
is navigating the world and
relationships well as the person you
actually are. So, not as this
disembodied version of yourself or this
person you're trying to kind of pretend
you are, but as someone who actually
knows and is in consistent touch with
themselves and who does a good job of
navigating the authentic relationship
between oneself and the rest of the
world. So, around the time that I got
really interested in this topic of
maturity, because I recognized myself at
a certain point in my life as someone
who was not maturing at the rate that I
was hoping I would, I started diving
into what people are actually talking
about when they use this word. And there
are a whole bunch of different measures
of maturity. There's all of this
research that's been done on it, and
everyone seems to use slightly different
constructs. So, I've narrowed it down to
five things that condense much of what
people tend to talk about when they talk
about what skills go into maturity. So,
we're going to look at these five
constructs, and we're also going to look
at the main error that a lot of us make
when evaluating that construct in
ourselves or other people, as well as
what it means to get in touch with it
more directly. So, we will start off
with the concept of independence. Most
people whether they are researchers or
lay people agree that to be mature as an
adult means that you've achieved some
level of
independence. Now the thing that we very
often mistake for independence that
leads us to performing it more so than
actually embodying it is we mistake
either
counterdependence or martyrdom for
independence. When we are behaving in a
counterdependent way, what we are
essentially doing is actually fearing
depending on anything. Which means we
are trying to design a life where we do
not have to take anything from anyone or
any of the systems that we're surrounded
in in order to be okay. And what this
generally leads to and also where it
generally comes from is emotional
avoidance, which is not a particularly
resilient trait. Because as soon as
we're in a situation where we would
actually best be served by drawing from
the resources of other people or our
environments, we're not going to be able
to do
that. Now, the other thing we mistake
independence for is martyrdom. So,
essentially deciding that we have no
needs and we are only here to give and
serve other people. And the problem with
this framework is that in both cases,
it's just not true. We all have
interpersonal needs. We all have things
that we need to take from our
environment and from other people in
order to keep ourselves feeling okay.
And true maturity is actually being
aware of that and being able to call out
for ourselves consciously which needs we
have and designing a life where we are
going to be able to get those needs
fulfilled so that we can stay healthy
and resourced enough to give back to our
environments. not from a place of
superiority, but from a place of deep
cooperation. I'll never forget learning
to code this one assessment when I was
doing my master's degree that was
essentially assessing how parents were
adapting to having children. And one of
the questions that got asked was, "What
do you do when you are feeling
overwhelmed or angry or when you need
support?" And the parents who could give
a coherent response to that question, so
who could both admit and identify that
they sometimes got angry or felt
overwhelmed and that they needed support
were generally marked as being a lot
better adapted than the parents who
denied that they felt any of those
things and wanted to keep insisting that
they were perfectly fine all of the time
and were consistently able to respond to
their children's needs in a stress-free
way. That simply is not true for
anybody. All of us need support systems.
All of us have the best and healthiest
relationship to giving when we are
receiving in approximately equal
measure. And so when we go out looking
for maturity in ourselves or other
people, we don't just want to look at
how good am I at standing on my own in
life or how good is someone else at
making it through life without any
support. We want to look at how good am
I at recognizing where my weaknesses lie
and how I can design my environment in a
way where I am able to consistently get
the support I need in order to be my
best most charitable self without
burning out or having to chronically
avoid my own feelings. This is what true
maturity in the realm of independence
looks like. It looks a lot more like
interdependence than it does
counterdependence.
The second thing that pops up on almost
all measures of emotional maturity is
self-awareness. Most people across the
board agree that to be mature means to
know who you are, what you want, and
what's important to you in life. And I
don't disagree, but I think that it's
very easy to mistake having a lot of
well rehearsed stories about ourselves
for actual self-awareness.
Self-awareness at its core is generally
about how present we can stay with
ourselves on a momentto- moment basis.
Sometimes having a lot of labels that we
put on ourselves can actually be a way
of avoiding just being present with what
it feels like to be us. So when we are
looking at self-awareness, we don't just
want to look at our ability or someone
else's ability to describe our own
experiences. We want to look at the
ability to stay present with and
tolerate uncomfortable emotional
experiences without dissociating at
least most of the time. Generally, this
is the highest degree of self-awareness
that actually matters because it's the
kind of self-awareness that we can
actually put into practice in a way that
helps us integrate new ideas about
ourselves and other people and the world
as we go through life. This is very
different than spending a lot of time
thinking about how we want to represent
ourselves and then telling everybody
stories that we think will win them over
to that idea of ourselves that we want
to put out there. The most self-aware
people know that their self-image is
constantly changing. And if they want to
be as accurate as possible about
themselves, they have to be very open
and receptive to feedback on how other
people are perceiving them. And to be
attempting to control the narrative too
tightly on who we are generally
signifies some form of defensiveness or
internal fear of seeing oneself in a
certain light, which tends to make us a
little less self-aware than the average
person because there are areas where we
are blocked from knowing ourselves
deeply. So again, when we're looking for
self-awareness in ourselves or others,
what we want to be paying attention to
is how present does this person seem to
be most of the time and to what extent
are they open to feedback. These two
things are going to go a long way
generally in increasing our ability to
be accurate about our self-concept. The
third construct that shows up over and
over again in conversations about
emotional maturity is the construct of
self-regulation. And the easiest trap we
can fall into when we are trying to
evaluate self-regulation in either
ourselves or other people is mistaking
the absence of emotion for really good
regulation of emotion. So, a lot of us
tend to naturally think of people who
just seem really stoic and unaffected by
life as people who have exceptional
self-regulation skills online. When in
reality, once again, this is often a
product of avoidance. Unless someone's
calm nature comes not from suppressing
their feelings, but from being so
comfortable with welcoming them in
whenever they show up and expressing
them in a raw and direct way that
there's just very little they're holding
on to. So their nervous system can enjoy
a more general state of calm, knowing
that every time a wave arises, the wave
will be welcomed in, appreciated, and
expressed. When we live this way, we
tend to not fall into either patterns of
rumination. So endlessly trying to
analyze how we're feeling or suppressing
and ignoring how we're feeling. So
generally some signs that we're not
regulating ourselves particularly well
is that we're spending a lot of time
either thinking about how we want to
present our feelings to other people.
Because when we're spending a lot of
time fixating on how we want other
people to perceive our emotions, it's
generally because we're not trying to be
seen in exactly the experience we're
having. it's because we are trying to
get something out of the other person or
make them feel a particular way about us
that is then going to regulate us. Or if
we're getting really stuck in patterns
of analyzing and obsessing over our
feelings, this is generally another sign
that we are not very good at staying
with the raw experience of them. Other
patterns of poor self-regulation might
be withholding a lot of our feelings.
So, making the choice to not express a
lot of what we're going through or
feeling pretty emotionally shut down and
numbed out a lot of the time or
deliberately seeking ways to numb out
our feelings because they are
chronically too intense. And none of
this is stuff we want to be shaming
ourselves for, right? Not having good
emotional regulation skills is often
just a product of never having been
taught them. So there's totally work
that we can do in this department to
push our development forward. But the
thing we want to keep in mind is that to
be well regulated basically just means
to be comfortable with our raw emotions
as they arrive in our body. To be able
to label them to some extent that is
helpful for us in making sense of them
and also to be able to express them
directly without too much shame or
rumination in the way. So, for example,
to be able to notice when something is
making us angry and to be able to just
say it in the moment that we're feeling
it or to notice that we're feeling sad
or down and to give ourselves the space
that our body needs to be a little bit
more downregulated for a period of time.
So, having good emotional regulation
skills is not about feeling one thing
all of the time. It is in fact about
welcoming in all of our emotions and
being able to work with them effectively
so that we are not holding chronic
tension or stress in our body by virtue
of trying to avoid, get rid of, or
change certain emotions that really just
want to be expressed. And again, this
might take some education because if we
don't know how to express our emotions
in a way that is non-abusive, it's going
to be a little bit of a road to getting
there. But this is all stuff that can
absolutely be learned. The thing we want
to be watching out for the most though
when we're thinking about our ability to
be in right relationship with our
emotions or other people's is the extent
to which we're able to be congruent. So
how much do our insides and our outsides
match? How much are we making clear to
other people how it is that we feel on
the inside without all of these layers
of stories and interpretation and blame
or whatever it is on top of our
feelings. The extent to which we can
experience the raw form of them and be
honest about our raw experience of them
is generally the extent to which we can
be congruent and in right relationship
with our feelings. The next construct
that a lot of people bring up when it
comes to evaluating emotional maturity
is interpersonal conflict resolution
skills. So, how well can we navigate
through situations where what we want is
at odds with what somebody else who
matters to us wants? And I think the
easiest thing to mistake for good
interpersonal skills, especially in this
day and age, is people walking around
talking like they are in HR department
rather than just being embodied about
what they feel. And I have a lot of
empathy for this. I get why it happens.
And I think in the future I will
probably make a video that directly
addresses the whole phenomenon of
therapy speech being used in everyday
conversations. Now, when we do not have
a lot of good language for our emotions
and for what our needs are and for the
boundaries that we want to set, it can
be really tempting to go almost overly
clinical in setting those boundaries
down or in communicating those things to
other people. But if in our everyday
lives we are speaking to our partners
and our friends and our loved ones like
we are reading directly out of a
psychology textbook, it's usually an
indication that we're actually quite
afraid of expressing what we actually
feel or think in its raw form and
getting rejected and maybe not knowing
how to deal with that rejection if it
does come online. But a humongous part
of having actual mature conflict
resolution skills is knowing both how to
be vulnerable, which means how to put
your feelings out there in a way that is
honest but not necessarily guaranteeing
that the other person is going to
respond properly to it. And knowing how
to manage your disappointment if you
don't get what you want out of your
relational dynamics. So real
interpersonal maturity is not about
being super clinical about our wants and
needs. It's about actually being able to
advocate for them from our body and stay
present and on the page with the other
person involved as to any impact that
that might be having on them. So, what
we're really going for here is a sense
of equinimity, of feeling like we are
finding the right balance between our
needs and someone else's, which includes
knowing when those things are just too
at odds for us to be really close to
another person and being able to process
and adjust around that without making
either person the villain. And when we
can do that, where we end up is a place
where we're able to be flexible and
responsive to other people's needs in
relationships without abandoning our
own. And this is a really hard place to
get to. I'm not going to sugarcoat this,
especially if we grow up insecurely
attached. We are probably going to be at
a significant deficit in this category.
But we cannot fasttrack our way to
maturity by simply mimicking the way we
think a mature person would talk. We
have to actually learn to get in touch
with ourselves, bring who we are into
the conflicts we're having, and stay
present and receptive to the other
person as they actually are, not as we
think they should be. And only then can
we develop those responsive and flexible
styles that allow us to navigate through
conflict well in a humongous variety of
situations. And the final construct
we're going to talk about today that
tends to get discussed in conversations
about maturity is responsibility. So
essentially the ability to be able to
rise to the practical challenges of
one's life and consistently meet them
head on. And I think that's something it
is really easy to mistake for
responsibility is rigidity. So, when we
do not know how to self-regulate against
things like existential anxiety or
uncomfortable feelings, having really
rigid routines in place can compensate a
lot for that and it can make us feel
safe and contained inside of uncertain
circumstances. But life is one giant
uncertain circumstance. And if the only
way we know how to be consistent in our
responses to meeting challenges are to
control every aspect of our lives, we're
not going to have a very flexible skill
set for moving through a lot of areas of
life that require engagement with more
uncertainty. So instead of rigid
self-discipline, what we really want to
look at developing in our lives is a
sense of devotion. So the ability to
both check in with ourselves and
routinely evaluate what it is that
matters to us, what our hearts really
want out of our lives, and then find the
best possible route towards consistently
fulfilling that for ourselves or for
other people if what we want for our
lives is some sort of mission that's
greater than ourselves. And usually kind
of a balance of both is what makes for a
satisfying life. But we need to be able
to figure out how to put the things that
matter most to us at the center of our
lives and then be flexible and adaptable
in how we meet those needs. I do have a
whole video on this that I'll link in
the description of this video, but
essentially getting rid of this idea
that the only way to be successful in
life is to be extremely regimented about
the way that we are approaching it.
Which very often by the way is why a lot
of us struggle so much to be
disciplined. Because if we have that
belief that the only way to be a
responsible person is to force myself to
act in a highly specific and regimented
way regardless of how I'm feeling or
what feels right to me. We might have a
fairly consistent no response to that in
our body. Our bodies are probably
properly reacting to that not being a
very authentic way to live. And so
again, we want to find that middle
ground of figuring out what matters to
us and figuring out a whole bunch of
different routes we could take to stay
connected to what matters to us most in
life that are adaptable as the
circumstances of our lives continuously
change and surprise us, which they
absolutely are always going to. So the
point that I really want to drive home
here is that for any of the principles
of maturity to apply to us in a
consistent way, we have to be bringing
our whole authentic selves into them
instead of trying to detach from
ourselves in order to perform maturity.
So we want to look at how we or other
people are best showing up as
interdependent, present, congruent,
responsive, and devoted to the things
that matter to us in life. And the more
we can move towards these things in a
way that takes our whole selves on board
with us as we go, the more resilient our
own concept of maturity becomes. because
it's no longer something that's
dependent upon our lives fitting into a
certain set of circumstances. It's a
responsive program that we can take with
us through anything that life throws our
way. All right, this is obviously very
far from the only things that we could
be talking about when it comes to
maturity. So, if you have other thoughts
on the matter or any questions or any
things you want to riff on, please leave
it in the comment section below. As
always, I love you guys. I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each other
and I will see you back here again
really soon.
[Music]