Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. This month on this channel, we're
talking about resilience. And today in
particular, we're going to be talking
about emotional pain. Now, this is a
video I've been really excited about for
a while because I think that we get so
many conflicting messages about what
emotional pain means and when we ought
to attend to it. And this is something
that I have always been working to be in
right relationship with as my life has
gone on. I grew up a natural repressor.
So emotional pain would not make it into
my awareness very often. But what would
happen is I would have a whole bunch of
secondary defense mechanisms that would
come out screaming and wreaking havoc on
my life when I was in pain that I
couldn't recognize. And then as I went
through my healing journey, I learned to
hone in and really focus on emotional
pain, to use it as a teacher and to give
it credit for the role that it plays in
keeping me an emotionally healthy
person. But I found that on either end
of the spectrum, I was actually
struggling to understand what emotional
pain required attention and what didn't.
So, on the suppression side of things, I
was struggling to understand why my life
was so rife with addictive behaviors,
compulsive behaviors, relationship
problems, I couldn't really find the
source of where all of this was coming
from. And then on the other side of the
spectrum, when I got super attuned to my
pain and really good at responding to
it, I eventually reached a point where I
had to sit down and ask myself the
question, am I overattending to pain?
like I haven't felt joy or happiness or
excitement in a while. What is the role
of healthy suppression? So, of choosing
not to attend to pain versus knowing
when it's there and needs our attention.
And so, that's exactly what we're going
to go over in this video. Now, I want to
be clear that the pain rating scale I'm
referencing in this video is a metaphor.
This is not a clinical measuring tool
for rating emotional pain. I'm sure one
might exist somewhere, but basically
where I came to this metaphor that we're
going to go into shortly is I came
across a chart online that was
describing the different levels of
physical pain. So from zero being no
pain and feeling completely normal in
one's body to 10 being essentially pain
that would cause us to shortly go
unconscious and everything in between.
And I thought it is so cool and helpful
to have this as a model of how to judge
where we're at in terms of physical pain
because we don't necessarily know what
someone else's five means versus what
our five out of 10 on a pain scale
means. And what we're going to talk
about today is translating those
physical pain scales. So I took a few of
them and created kind of an amalgamated
version into an emotional pain scale. So
looking at how most people tend to react
to emotional pain at what levels in
order for us to start gaining some
context of what we might be dealing with
emotionally if we air on that more
repressed side of things and struggle to
notice our emotional pain in our
conscious awareness or to notice where
we might be giving it too much attention
if we're airing on the other side of
that spectrum and really fixating on and
honing in on emotional problems.
sometimes at the expense of just simply
leaving things to breathe a little bit.
What we're going to be looking at today
is putting emotional pain on a scale of
0 to 10, similar to the way that doctors
and health professionals sometimes ask
their patients to rate physical pain on
a scale of 0 to 10. So the first level
of pain that we could be experiencing is
zero. A patient in the doctor's office
who is experiencing absolutely no pain
would report a zero. A human being who
is feeling incredibly happy and well
reggulated might also report a zero if
you ask them about their emotional pain.
And I feel like these moments in life
are kind of few and far between. But we
will start the scale with that as a
reference point. Now when you look at
physical pain scales, one tends to
represent minimal pain. So someone who
might have something that feels a little
uncomfortable in their body, but it's
hardly noticeable. And this can
absolutely be the case with emotional
pain, too. This can kind of be thought
of as one of those days where we feel a
little bit off in a couple of moments
during the day, but it's not really a
big deal and the moment kind of passes
and it's very easy to move on from it.
We probably won't even remember that it
happened later on. So, when our
emotional pain level is at a one, just
kind of forgetting about it and going on
with our day will probably put us back
into a regulated state without really
having to think about it. Two on a
physical pain scale tends to indicate
mild discomfort. So, this is the kind of
physical pain where if you pay attention
to it, you notice it, but it's also not
that hard to kind of ignore it and get
on with things. And emotionally, we
experience this kind of pain, too,
right? Someone might say something to us
and we might go, "Huh, did they have a
tone with that? Or was something off
there?" But it's pretty easy for us to
forget about it if we're not consciously
recalling it back into memory and just
kind of moving on with our day without
fear that it's going to keep
interrupting our conscious awareness.
Mild discomfort, but not really
something that's throwing us off.
Level three is where we start more
consciously experiencing persistent
pain. So on a physical pain scale, level
three is generally categorized as pain
that's uncomfortable but tolerable. So
having something going on in your body
that bothers you but is usually easy
enough to ignore. On an emotional level,
this might be akin to having a kind of
off day or having a conversation with
someone that kind of irks you, but you
don't really feel existential about the
pain yet. You're not preoccupied with
thoughts of everything falling apart.
You're maybe a little irritated or just
grumpy, but you can choose to divert
your attention and focus on other things
at will. So, these levels of pain,
everything from 0 to three, is what I
would group in as absolutely normal,
maybe even unusually good emotional
functioning. Might be the types of pain
that we experience when we are either
growing into a new habit. So, we're
trying to do things differently and
we're getting a little annoyed or
frustrated in the process, but we can
choose to deal with that frustration at
will. This kind of pain might also be
side effects of other things in our
lives that are going well. So, starting
a new relationship, but having to adjust
to little things like there are parts of
sleeping over at this person's house
that I don't like as much as sleeping in
my house or feeling some nervousness at
a new job. or they might be subtly
pointing at areas of our lives that are
going to need some course correcting if
we keep moving down the path we're
moving down. So little problems that are
cropping up on route to some other
direction we're moving in. And this is
really great if we can draw our
attention to those things and course
correct right at the beginning. Let's
say you're getting to know someone new
and there's a small thing they do that
kind of annoys you. this might be a good
time to just ask about it or bring it up
and see if there's a different way you
can do that thing so that it doesn't get
more annoying to you as time goes on.
But essentially, when it comes to 0 to
three level emotional pain, what we want
to keep in mind is that we're still at
choice when it comes to when we are
attending to this pain. So, we don't
need to stop everything to deal with
this stuff. Generally, we can fit it
into our schedule and the rest of the
time carry on as normal without getting
distracted by feeling dregulated. So,
you're probably suppressing this stuff
when you need to do things like go to
work and then choosing times to talk to
your friends about it or decompress
after a stressful day or whatever it is.
But again, you are at choice here. And
also, you probably want to make sure
that you're attending to this stuff as
your second or third priority, not your
first. Now, level four. This is where
pain starts intruding more consciously
into your experience. So, four on a
physical pain scale tends to indicate
moderate and persistent pain. So pain
that we notice all of the time and
cannot find a way to fully adapt to. On
an emotional level, this might mean that
we're going through something in our
personal lives that is a little bit on
our mind all of the time. We can't
really find a way to just detach from it
and get on with our day fully. Now, this
is the point in the pain scale where we
really start seeing differences in how
people with more secure attachment
systems are going to respond to pain
versus those with more insecure
attachment styles. If you are secure,
this is generally the level at which
consciously your thoughts start
orienting around whatever it is that
you're feeling pain over. If you are
insecurely attached, this might be where
you start feeling disregulated but can't
pinpoint why. So, you're just feeling a
little grouchy or someone's just
annoying you kind of consistently or
you're feeling a little bit detached in
your relationship, but you're not quite
sure why, but it is becoming a constant
problem. We can't really fully suppress
it. Which means if the problem is
consciously available to you, it's going
to be on your mind a lot of the time. If
the problem is not consciously available
to you because you have defense
mechanisms in place that prevent you
from consciously seeing it, you are
going to start getting disregulated and
experiencing low-level neurotic pain. If
you don't know what I mean when I say
that, I will link a video in the
description of this one that goes over
what I mean by the term neurotic. But
essentially, neurotic pain is just pain
that is emanating out of a psychological
blind spot. So, for example, if you have
an avoidant attachment style and it's
really tricky for you to see when you're
feeling vulnerable, you might start
feeling contempt in the areas where your
system is actually logging you as
vulnerable. Or if you air more anxious,
you might have feelings of anxiety or
distress in these areas. And these
patterns are going to continue as we
move down the pain scale. Five on a
physical pain scale generally indicates
strong pain. This is pain that we notice
all of the time and we have become in
some ways preoccupied with attending to
at the expense of other things. And this
type of pain when it's physical might
start lending itself at this level to
changes in our personality or the way
that we are showing up to other people
because this pain is now pretty heavily
intruding into our day-to-day life. And
so that's going to impact our mood. And
so this is where if you are securely
attached, you're likely to be quite
conscious of the fact that you are going
through it. That something is up in your
life that it needs attending to and you
need to be consciously placing your
attention on how you can work with it,
soo yourself around it, and respond to
whatever situation is causing it. If you
are not particularly securely attached
and if you have a lot of unconscious
wounds that come up for you when you're
struggling, this is likely when you are
going to start experiencing chronic
neurotic patterns. So you might notice
yourself frequently reverting to old
patterns of reaction that you may have
learned in childhood. So you might find
yourself lashing out more often or if
you air more avoidant, withdrawing from
situations that you find stressful
chronically. So at this phase, we're no
longer really feeling fully like
ourselves. Our normal ways of
functioning and coping with problems are
getting eclipsed by whatever patterns
come online for us when life gets
distressing. So, if we have things like
insecure attachment patterning, like
complex PTSD, or other forms of
relational wounding, this might be kind
of the tipping point where we stop being
as concerned with acting normal and kind
of keeping up a front and instead we're
more frequently giving in to our
neurotic patterns of thinking and
feeling and behaving. Predominantly, we
are acting from a place of pain, whether
that pain is conscious to us or not. And
much of our behavior is oriented around
trying to soothe our internal distress.
Again, even if we are not conscious of
what that internal distress is. So,
let's say I'm experiencing separation
anxiety, but my system doesn't clock
that because maybe I air more avoidant.
But suddenly, I notice I'm becoming
really rigid and inflexible in my
behavior because I am chronically trying
to keep at bay the feelings of anxiety
that my system is pummeling me with. Or
maybe I notice that more days than not
I'm comfort eating instead of eating
what my body actually craves and wants
because again I'm feeling pain on a
level that is not necessarily conscious
to me but that my body is still
consistently now trying to regulate
around. Level six on a physical pain
scale is generally categorized as
intense. So at this level we are
struggling to do things like think
clearly, hold down a job, have a normal
social life because we are so
preoccupied with our consistent pain.
Now on an emotional level again for a
secure person this is generally the
point where they go okay I now need to
rearrange some things in my life in
order to attend to this pain. So it has
eclipsed my ability to meet the demands
of my life. Well maybe I need to take
some time off work. Maybe I need to call
in a support system, so ask someone to
come stay with me for a while. Maybe I
need to get myself into therapy or find
some other support networks because it's
clear that this pain is now interfering
significantly with my ability to manage
my life effectively.
And if we are not in that secure type of
programming where we are able to a
recognize that we're in pain in the
first place and b give ourselves the
permission we need to call in support to
seek that out to accept it. What might
happen is that our maladaptive coping
mechanisms might be getting really
compulsive at this point. So we might be
feeling really withdrawn or really
desperate to be in connection with
someone who can help soothe our pain at
almost all times. If we have CBTSD or
toxic shame, this might be the point
where we start shaming ourselves super
heavily because we recognize that we're
no longer meeting the demands of our
day-to-day life very well. But instead
of clocking that the reason we're
struggling so much is because we're in
pain, we might just tell ourselves the
story, I am just not trying hard enough
or I'm just not doing as good a job as
other people without looking at the
resources that we are lacking. So that
could be things like social support,
stability, financial security, all of
these things that go into keeping us
regulated. If we're not cognizant of
those, we might just go into shaming
ourselves when we're struggling to cope
if our unconscious pain has reached a
certain threshold, rather than looking
at this as the point where we most need
to give ourselves grace and be willing
to adjust our circumstances in order to
give ourselves a chance at getting
better. So this range the 4 to six range
is when you are in an involuntary
relationship with pain. It is there. It
is present. It is persistent and it is
messing up your life and it does not
care if you have other responsibilities.
It is going to intrude into your
awareness. either again through direct
thoughts about the pain if you're able
to consciously access those or through
obsessive thoughts about some form of
coping mechanism that you have developed
as a soothing mechanism around the pain.
Now at these levels, levels four to six,
you need an action plan to address the
pain. So this is at the point where
suppression is not going to work anymore
and it is only going to make things
worse. but it's maybe not yet at the
level where you need to completely
reorganize your entire life and do
nothing but attend to the pain. So, this
might be something like recognizing
depending on where you're falling
between that 4 to six range that it's
time to intentionally devote some of
your resources to this problem. So for
myself, when I find myself in this
range, it's generally when I go, okay,
is it time for me to take a little bit
of time off work or call up someone in
my network and start getting direct
emotional support about this problem? Is
it time to schedule an extra therapy
session? Is it time to funnel some of my
vital resources like time, energy, and
money towards getting better at managing
this pain and finding a way to deal with
whatever is causing it in a way that
will not cause it to get worse. And
everything we've talked about so far
from level 0 to level six is completely
and totally normal pain levels that are
absolutely just akin to being alive. So
secure people frequently experience pain
between levels of 0 to six all the time
and they have resources for coping with
it because they're able to consciously
recognize it. So a lot of the skill of
moving from insecure to secure
attachment is actually being able to
recognize when we're in pain and being
willing to consciously attend to it in a
way that is non-destructive or at least
making conscious tradeoffs about it. So,
yeah, maybe we're going to spend a
little bit of time or money on solving
this problem, but we know what
trade-offs we're making and we're at
choice about it. We are not simply
letting the pain take over and watching
our lives crumble in a way that we feel
out of control of. And a lot of the work
when it comes to getting to that point
is simply learning to not ignore pain
when it is at a four to six level. And
instead to use things like flare-ups of
our addictive behaviors or our neurotic
thought patterns as indications that we
are probably in psychological pain that
we are not consciously noticing or
processing. And so we can actually use
those as clues that it's time to start
attending directly to pain before it
crosses the next threshold. Because at
level seven on a physical pain level,
pain becomes
unmanageable. And I really like this
word because the word unmanageable is
one that you see used all over the place
in 12step literature. Programs like
Alcoholics Anonymous and other programs
that deal with addictive patterns really
encourage people to look at the point at
which their addictive behaviors meant
that they were no longer able to manage
the priorities of the rest of their
lives. So they were letting their
addictions take precedence over their
family lives or over their careers. And
so this is what happens when we reach
emotional pain level seven or above. The
pain becomes unmanageable and it starts
impacting the rest of our lives
involuntarily. We are now consciously or
unconsciously in pain all of the time
and most of our unconscious resources
are directing themselves at trying to
get the pain to lessen. So, believe it
or not, if you have something like
complex PTSD or toxic shame, this might
be the state that you are in quite
frequently where essentially your whole
psyche is so wounded and filled with so
much shame and unconscious pain that
it's really hard for you to live a
normal life. So, at this point, we're
probably really struggling to maintain
close relationships, to hold down a job,
to pay our bills on time, or to do other
activities that essentially allow us to
engage with society. And in some ways,
we might feel totally out of control
when it comes to our addictions or
compulsions or thought patterns that
feel self-defeating. At this point, it
feels like our pain is eclipsing our
ability to lead a normal life. And this
is often a place we arrive to precisely
because we don't know how to address
pain at the lower levels. And so then
the compulsions or the addictive
patterns that we develop to start
numbing out pain at those lower levels
create secondary problems that snowball
until we get to a place where it's
really tricky for us to meet the demands
of regular life. Again, compounded by
the fact that we are not looking at our
pain and calling it pain. We are looking
at our pain and calling it us being not
good enough. So a big part of this
process is actually associating to
whatever it is that feels emotionally
painful in our lives. Making it
conscious for ourselves and then dealing
with it directly through therapy,
support groups, social networks,
whatever it is, so that these things
don't snowball as often into this realm
of
unmanageability. Level eight on the
physical pain scale is severe pain. So
pain that makes it hard to think about
anything else and that we just want to
relieve at any cost. And this is very
often akin to what it feels like to be
in a trauma response. A severe trauma
response is going to put us in that 8 to
10 range where we are no longer even
consciously thinking about what we want
to do. We are just taking action to get
the untolerable feeling out of our
bodies as quickly as possible. So we're
no longer really at choice and we're
kind of just reacting from instinct at
this level. And this is a really
beautiful thing to have compassion for
yourself about. So I remember getting to
a point in my healing journey where I
realized it had been a long time since
my life had felt
unmanageable, which was really cool cuz
my life felt unmanageable for most of my
life. But every now and then I would
still flip into an occasional eight
where I would have a trauma response
that would come online and I didn't care
what I had to do. I would pay any price
to simply get out of that pain. and
having compassion for that and
recognizing I'm doing this not because
I'm a failure but because a trauma
response has spiked my emotional pain
levels up to an eight where my system is
willing to do anything to get rid of the
pain allows me to work with this in
context and look at the problem as it
actually exists when we are at level
seven and 8 in terms of emotional pain
we basically need support so we need
things like therapists or mentors or
support groups to help us find
non-destructive ways of regulating
because our emotional pain has become so
all-encompassing that it's now
challenging for us to find our way out
on our own. So this is once again where
we really want to be reaching out to
people or organizations that can provide
support for those who are in crisis. And
then levels 9 and 10 are essentially
when our coping mechanisms have
completely taken over. So maybe we are
completely dissociated now. And
generally these levels are where we need
direct intervention. So we might need to
be hospitalized for a period of time or
have someone around us 24 hours a day
because we aren't even able to meet the
day-to-day demands of feeding ourselves
or maintaining our hygiene or whatever
it is. So now that we've looked at this
whole scale, what do we want to take
away from it? There are a couple of main
things. One, recognizing that to be
secure and to have done trauma healing
does not mean that you won't feel pain
anymore. It just means that you will
feel significantly less neurotic pain,
which means pain that we aren't aware
where it is coming from. Instead, we'll
be able to get clearer on both why we're
struggling emotionally as well as what
we need to do to tend to that struggle
in as productive a way as possible. So,
this is about developing the awareness
of when we want to be employing which
coping skills. Again, 0 to three, a
little bit of suppression is probably
fine, and we just want to make sure that
we're keeping up with our routines and
we're able to keep up with the things
that naturally regulate us. Then levels
four to six, this is where we want to
start actively rearranging things in
order to cope with our pain. So, when
I'm going through these periods, I like
to think of it as my job, whether it's
part-time or full-time, depending on
what's happening right now, is to attend
to my own mental health. So that might
mean putting 15 to 20 hours in a week
towards doing activities like seeing
friends or getting rest or things that I
know are going to regulate me. This is
likely to save me from tipping towards
that level seven where my life starts
becoming
unmanageable. And what we also want to
remember is that if we do tip into that
seven or beyond range, the most
important thing to do is to not shame
and blame ourselves for ending up there.
But to look at this as our system's
natural response to pain and to start
looking for help that can help get us
back on track. At the seven plus range,
we need to be basically attending to our
pain at the expense of almost anything
else because otherwise we will be
neurotically coping at the expense of
anything else. So this might be time
where you actually need to take a leave
of absence from work and get yourself
into some form of treatment that can
help you deal with the level of pain you
are experiencing. It might be where you
ask someone to move in with you
full-time for a while because you don't
necessarily trust yourself to cope in a
way that isn't going to put you in
harm's way. So, this is the point at
which we need to be intervening in our
own lives because otherwise we might
reach a crisis point. And the cool thing
is no matter where we start on this
scale and no matter where we move up or
down, the more awareness we have, the
more we are able to actually tackle our
problems at the core. So if we are
suppressing when we need to be
rearranging, we can notice that and we
can go, you know what, actually right
now I need to tend to my mental health
pretty intensively. And we can stop that
snowball from worsening. But it also
means that if we're going through a
period where we do need to tend to our
pain full-time, we don't have to shame
ourselves for that anymore. Just like a
person experiencing level seven or eight
pain physically could not meet the
demands of everyday life, neither can a
person who is experiencing level seven
or eight pain emotionally. Sometimes it
really is time to stop and attend to
ourselves at any cost. And then as we
heal and get better, we can also use the
pain scale to determine what we can now
take on again that we temporarily had to
put on hold while we were dealing with
our emotional pain or mental health.
All right, I'm going to leave this at
that for today, but essentially what I
hope you take away from this video is
just the idea that emotional pain really
does demand to be felt. And if we do not
feel it directly, we will feel it
neurotically. So, we want to be working
towards a place where we're able to
validate our pain for ourselves and take
the action at the level it needs to be
taken in order to resolve and soothe it.
All right, any questions, comments,
curiosities popping up for you as you've
gone through this video, please leave
them in the comment section below. As
always, I love you guys. I hope you're
taking care of yourselves and each
other, and I will see you back here
again really soon.
[Music]