The body and the brain learn
differently. So the brain learns things
through grasping concepts. We generally
say that we know something or that we
understand something when we are able to
explain it in words and when we have a
kind of clear and coherent idea of it
inside of our heads. But this is very
differently than how the body learns.
The body learns through experience. So
the body knows something is true when it
has experienced it and it has formed a
memory of that experience that lives
again in the nervous system. So a big
mistake that a lot of us make when we're
trying to work with things like trauma
or our physiological preferences is that
we think just frontloading our brains
with information will get us to the
point where our body now trusts that
it's safe to behave differently. And
what I want to make clear is that I'm
not knocking the conscious way of
learning. The mind is very important for
things like discernment and figuring out
where we even need to do this work in
the first place. But the body has to
learn through experience. So if we want
to build up our distress tolerance, we
cannot simply frontload our brain with a
bunch of information about triggers and
the nervous system and how this all
works. We have to actually go put
ourselves in situations where we are
making the choice to react differently
than we have in the past. And then we
have to stay present and associated for
long enough that our body is able to log
the experience as a memory of a time
when we did something and stayed safe.
And the thing that's really important to
remember here is that we can be in a
flight response mentally. So if I have a
phobia of flying and I force myself to
get on a 100 airplanes, if I am just
dissociating through the entire
experience, my body is not going to log
that flight as a memory of a time when I
was safe because I was not relaxing into
the experience and allowing myself to
actually log in my body. I am safe here.
Okay. Now I want to once again be clear.
Safe does not mean I feel good. Safe
does not mean I like this environment.
Safe just means I am able to relax and
be present and at choice about how I'm
responding without my life being in
danger. So our bodies learn distress
tolerance not through the mind but
through the nervous system. And that's
just one of the cardinal rules we're
going to keep in mind as we talk about
how to do the process of building this
tolerance.