Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. This month on this channel, we've
been talking about resilience. And today
in particular, I want to talk about the
concept of learned helplessness as it
pertains to complex PTSD, toxic shame,
or in a lot of cases, fearful or
disorganized attachment. So basically
what all of these constructs have in
common is that in a lot of these cases
certain parts of the personality
specifically the feeling parts of the
personality. So the parts of ourselves
that operate on instinct basically
develop the idea that they are not
welcome outside of the body. So this is
what happens when at a young age our
emotional inner worlds are repeatedly
shamed, rejected, punished or in some
cases triggering to the people around us
andor met with abuse when they get
expressed. And when this happens to us,
essentially what we learn is that if I
want to have agency in the world, so if
I want to enjoy a sense of independence
and autonomy and respect and the ability
to get what I want out of my
environment, I have to develop a false
persona that leaves out some or all of
my core instincts and emotions. And at
the time when we developed this idea,
it's generally one that's quite adaptive
because once again, children grow up
just naturally expressing their feelings
and needs, this is what our bodies are
designed to do. and in a healthy and
secure caregiving environment. It's not
that parents fold to their children's
every need or wish, but they're able to
help their children make sense of those
needs and those emotions as they're
arising without shaming them or giving
the children the idea that they're wrong
for having those feelings. But what
happens in those caregiving environments
where emotional expression, whether
that's all emotions or just certain
ones, are either shamed, rejected,
punished, or completely ignored. So you
can develop complex PTSD symptoms simply
from having emotional neglect as a child
and not having a lot of mirroring around
your emotions. And in any of these
cases, what we internalize as children
is generally that if we want to make an
impact on our environment in any way, so
if we want to get what is needed from
our environment, we have to operate from
a false self that keeps either certain
or all of our emotions repressed. So as
we grow up, we might think, yeah, I can
have autonomy and agency in the world. I
can act in a way that gets me what I
want out of life, but I cannot use my
feelings to guide that process. I have
to start living predominantly from my
head. And we generally get pretty good
at reasoning out what is likely to keep
us safe without having to actually
consult how we're feeling. Now, the
problem is that our body's instincts do
not just disappear when we stop paying
attention to them. Our bodies still get
angry when we feel disrespected. They
still feel grief when we lose something.
They still experience paralysis and fear
when we're in a stressful
situation. But if we've learned that
these signals our bodies give us not
only are unimportant, but actually
impede upon our ability to get what we
want out of life, we're kind of left
with one option, which is to numb our
feelings out. Because otherwise, those
feelings are likely to get in the way of
a lot of the stuff that we want to get
done in the world. And so if we have
that sense of learned helplessness
around our feelings, of giving up on
them as reliable sources of information
or useful things to communicate to the
world, we have to find ways to
disconnect from them internally so that
we are not chronically distracted by
them. So this can look like managing our
physical state through substances.
Whether those substances are legal or
illegal, there are many ways to numb out
that do not necessarily require us to
break the law. This can look like
developing really rigid behavioral
patterns or compulsions that give us
temporary relief from the feeling states
that we don't want to be in. This can
look like getting endlessly stuck in
thought loops or rumination loops inside
of our minds because we are chronically
trying to understand something that
actually requires our emotions to make
sense of. And there are many more ways
that we can numb out our feeling state.
But what we want to pay attention to
here is the fact that well this may
genuinely have been adaptive for us
early on in life. We often have no idea
if we grow up with toxic shame or other
forms of CPTTSD like wounding that as
adults the very thing which was once
maladaptive for us which was being aware
of and acting based on instinct is now
in fact potentially quite adaptive. We
just haven't thought to reconnect with
ourselves in that way. So this is where
we are going to explicitly look at the
concept of learned helplessness. The
concept of learned helplessness
originated from this experiment that was
done in the '60s using three different
groups of dogs where basically one group
of dogs was placed in a room where they
were administered electrical shocks that
they had no control over. So they were
unable to predict when the shocks would
happen and they were unable to do
anything to stop the shocks. Another
group of dogs was placed in a room with
no shocks administered. And another
group of dogs was placed in a room where
they were able to escape the shocks. So
they would get shocked, but they could
press a panel with their nose that would
stop the shocks. Then they took all
three groups of dogs and put them in the
same situation. And in this situation,
they were administered shocks that were
escapable. So they could change the
situation and stop receiving shocks. The
group of dogs that never received any
shocks, they got out of the situations
quite quickly. Same goes for the dogs
who were administered shocks in the
first part of the experiment but had the
option to escape them or make them stop.
They had already learned there is a way
to get out of unpleasant situations. And
then that last group of dogs, the ones
who had in the initial condition been
administered shocks that they could not
predict or escape, didn't even try to
get out of the environment they were put
in in that second part of the experiment
when shocks that were escapable were
administered to them because their brain
had internalized when you get shocked,
you have no autonomy and cannot escape
from this. So don't even try. And this
concept got coined as learned
helplessness. Even in situations where
they actually were no longer helpless,
the dogs had no idea how to go searching
for opportunities to help themselves
because their brains had internalized
that there is nothing they can do to
control their circumstances. And this
phenomenon is absolutely transferable to
human beings. When we learn as children
that our actual authentic selves do not
have control over our situations and the
only way to survive our situations is to
adapt, what happens is we find ways
internally again through numbing out and
shutting down to adapt tolerable
situations. Just like the dogs in that
experiment learned to simply endure
shocks in the first part of that
experiment because they didn't see
another option. So when we adopt that
pattern of feeling pain or distress and
assuming there is nothing we can do
other than finding a way to detach from
it and endure it, what happens is that
as adults, when we find ourselves in
other situations, whether that's at
work, in relationships, whatever it is
that are intolerable for the average
person, for some of us with certain
types of wounding, our minds do not
clock those situations as intolerable.
They simply clock it as time to
disconnect from myself and endure. When
in reality, we might be that dog who is
now in the second part of the experiment
where there are way more options to us
available than simply shut down and
endure a bad situation. But we haven't
learned to do that contexting to look
around and ask ourselves, are more
options available here? Because again,
our entire nervous system is wired to
believe that there are not. And so where
this becomes really important is when as
adults we find ourselves in positions
where actually reconnecting to our
instincts and listening to the wisdom of
our emotions is incredibly important for
designing our lives. But we just go on
assuming that information is pointless
and so we don't tune into it. And we
tend to develop a lot of problems as a
result of that. Because emotions are not
designed to be nuisances or things that
come up for us that only lead to
disconnection. Our feelings are actually
meant to serve as internal compasses
that guide us through life in strategic
ways. So our feelings are there to help
us understand what our nos are and where
our boundaries need to be set as well as
what our yeses are and what we want to
move towards in life. So that's what
we're going to start talking about now.
how to unlearn the helplessness that our
feeling self has internalized and start
giving that part of ourselves a way to
express itself and make direct contact
with the outside world. Now, if this
feels terrifying for you, don't worry.
We're going to talk about why this
process does not have to be as
excruciatingly shameful as your system
might immediately fear that it's going
to be. So when we have something like
toxic shame, complex PTSD, disorganized
attachment, anything that essentially
causes us to develop a persona that
operates to cover up our raw emotions,
essentially our self-concept looks like
this. We have the strategic top layer of
functioning, the version of ourselves
that we show to the world. It's who we
want people to think of us as. So when
someone calls our name into their mind,
we're pretty much always hoping really
hard that this is the version of us
they're thinking of. And this is our
false or adapted persona that leaves out
a lot of who we actually are. Now, the
layer underneath this is generally the
layer that those of us with toxic shame
assume is the real us. This layer might
include things like our compulsive
habits, our addictions, our obsessive
thought patterns, maybe things like
lirance. And all of these things are
actually not the core of who we are.
Though we might really deeply fear that
that's true if we have toxic shame. What
all of these things are are basically
the net that catches our raw emotional
expression and traps it when we don't
allow it to come out. So if we have
something like a feeling of joy arising
in us and we have learned that is not
okay to express, right? I cannot go up
to someone and express joy and happiness
about being in connection with them.
That would get me rejected. Then what
happens is our brain still has to do
something with that feeling. So it might
channel it into something like a fantasy
world where now maybe you have all of
these imaginary connections with people
who exist in your real life, but you're
too afraid to actually go up and share
your feelings with them. And so now
you're kind of stuck in this fantasy
world that exists as a layer on top of
reality. And you might have shame around
that because you might feel on some
level, oo, it's really creepy that I go
to work and interact with this person
really nicely and then go home and
imagine us getting married off the coast
of France in a hot air balloon every
night. But that lirant state, that
fantasy world, that is actually not the
core of who you are. That is a defense
your body has learned against the direct
expression of something like joy or lust
or excitement. In the same vein, let's
say something like anger starts rising
up in your system and you have learned
it is not okay. It is not safe to
express anger. Then we have to look at
okay what numbs out anger if not direct
expression. The answer to that is very
often habits like overeing or drinking
or obsessive ruminating thoughts. All of
those things can kind of catch the anger
so that it doesn't have the chance to
leave our bodies which we have
implicitly learned we cannot allow to
happen. And so this entire second layer
which is generally the cause of deep
unabiding shame in people who have toxic
shame is actually not the core of who
you are. It is simply what your body and
your system is doing to try to avoid who
you actually are from escaping. And who
you actually are is simply a human being
with a body that is constantly giving
you information in the form of instincts
and emotional responses. And the first
step in unlearning helplessness when it
comes to connecting the authentic self
directly to the world is to get clear on
the fact that that is all you are is a
human being with a body that has
feelings and instincts just like
everybody else. The only difference is
that you did not learn how to directly
and cleanly express those instincts and
find proper expression for them in the
world outside of your body. So you did
not learn to get angry and actually just
express your anger clearly and directly
and set your boundaries. You did not
learn to just feel joy or the desire to
be in connection with someone and to
just appreciate that and spend time
basking in the warmth of connection. Or
maybe you never learn that when you lose
something, it's a natural response for
the body to exist in a state of slowness
and grief until the feeling passes.
Something that we learn when we learn to
connect with our feelings and express
them directly as children is that all
feelings just kind of pass with time
once we are congruent about them and we
let them out and have them be witnessed
and seen by other people. And so step
one in reclaiming our agency and our
autonomy if we have lost it at a very
young age is essentially just to
identify that to be clear with ourselves
that all our feelings are is sensations
that are happening in the body. And all
of these neurotic habits and thought
patterns that we think are the core of
who we are are actually just our bodies
being unable to directly express what
arises naturally inside of us by virtue
of living. So the only thing we are at
our core is a human being who has
feelings like everybody else, but who
did not have a way of expressing them
congruently and directly early on. So
who developed a whole bunch of secondary
coping mechanisms to regulate around the
feelings that we could not express. But
there is a way to learn the skill of
congruence and direct expression. And
when we do that, that second layer
naturally stops feeling as relevant or
important to us. over time it starts
melting away. And so the question here
is once we become aware, at least on a
cognitive level, we don't have to feel
it all the way through yet, that there
is nothing inherently shameful about our
body having emotions and instincts, then
our task becomes learning to in small
ways honor those feelings and instincts
instead of subconsciously repressing
them and shutting them down. And this
takes a really long time in a lot of
cases to even develop the awareness to
notice what our raw momentto- moment
emotions are. But if we can try to at
least once a day as someone with CPTTSD
or toxic shame notice something we are
feeling on the raw sensate level. So
something like I'm feeling really tense.
Maybe that means I'm uncomfortable in
this situation.
If we can try once a day to just notice
at least a sensation we are having that
is occurring purely at that level of raw
instinct or emotion and name it. We are
already on our way to developing more
awareness about who we are which is the
first step in eventually being able to
live as the person that we are. So this
is the process of just letting ourselves
know my feelings are real. There is
nothing wrong with them and they just
exist. They don't have to be right or
wrong. I can just notice them. And then
once we're able to start noticing our
feelings a little bit more each day, we
want to see if we can start practicing
acting on them directly in small ways.
So this could be something as simple as
noticing when we feel tired and instead
of going into our self-shaming program
that goes, "You shouldn't be tired. You
should be back at work. The most
successful people are all working 60
hours a week. If you can give yourself
10 minutes to relax, to lie in bed, to
honor that sense of exhaustion, and to
admit to yourself that it's probably
signaling something real about your
body's needs. That is now giving your
body the signal that feelings and needs
are not only real, but they are things
that can be responded to, which is
likely what you didn't get growing up.
So again, we can do this really slowly
over a long period. Once a day, if you
can find some emotion or some need that
wants to be honored and interact
directly with it, you're going to be on
your way to developing more emotional
autonomy. And again, this can all be so
small. It can be something like checking
in with your body when making plans and
noticing if you actually don't want to
do a plan that's being proposed to you
and then kindly declining the offer
rather than saying yes because you feel
like you should. It's about making those
little choices that keep us from living
predominantly from our heads. And
there's nothing wrong with using our
rationality and using the brilliant
things that our brains provide us with.
But what we're working on here is giving
our feelings autonomy also so that
eventually we have our feelings and our
brains working together to give us the
best possible solutions that we are
capable of coming up with. So every day
can you find some small way to connect
with notice and honor some feeling that
you're having? This is the step where
all of the rest of the work is going to
start flowing out of. And as we go down
this path, what we want to be doing is
seeking out more and more environments
where emotional expression is safe and
welcome. And at this phase, we generally
do want to be controlling for our
environments a little bit. So if there
are certain environments where we know
the people in those environments are
going to be rejecting or shaming if we
start expressing our emotions, this is
not where we want to practice this. We
want to give ourselves the opportunity
to have corrective experiences of
expressing our feelings. So that might
mean doing something like finding a
therapist or a coach that you can start
expressing some of your more authentic
feelings to and notice what happens to
not have them be punished or rejected.
When I was in this phase for a period of
a couple years, I would go to one or two
12step groups a week. So either
codependents anonymous or adult children
of alcoholic and dysfunctional families
anonymous. And I would just practice
saying my feelings in a two-minute chair
and just noticing what it was like to
sit in a room and share my feelings
where the response was absolutely
nothing because you are not allowed to
directly respond to what people share in
12step meetings. And this was actually a
very healing experience for me who felt
a lot of fear at the prospect of
expressing what I was feeling. To just
share something about my week or my
emotional processing and have people
just kind of sit in front of me calmly
while I did it with absolutely no
negative retribution really helped
something rewire in my system. It helped
me to start see my own emotions and
experiences as neutral, just something
that absolutely everybody has. Other
things that personally help me at this
step, but again, you're going to want to
cater this to yourself, are things like
practicing circling, which is an
interpersonal meditation practice where
essentially you're letting people know
about what sensations are coming up in
your body and what thoughts you're
having or what emotions you're
experiencing in real time. Something
like that really helps train this muscle
in an environment that is explicitly
designed for people to reveal their
inner worlds. But the point is, we want
to be finding small places where we can
express ourselves with either very
little chance that we will be rejected
or ideally environments that are
specifically designed to be
non-rejecting like therapy or support
groups. Showing up to these environments
time and time again and expressing our
emotions as they authentically are time
and time again gives our body proof of
something new, which is that we actually
can express ourselves directly to the
world and at the least not suffer major
consequence. And the more our bodies
start to log that, the more confidence
our emotional selves build that they are
welcome in the world. And the cool thing
about this is that as you're going
through this process, you're exposing
yourself, your actual self, the one that
exists in your instincts and your body
to other people who can potentially
mirror things back to you. And so you're
now engaged in the process of figuring
out who you are at your core, which may
never have been available to you growing
up. And the more you learn about that
person, the more you'll also naturally
find ways where that person fits into
the world as your authentic self. I've
said this on here before, but a
humongous part of my own healing from
toxic shame was actually starting a
YouTube channel and being able to talk
directly to other people about what was
authentically on my mind and happening
in my body and learning that that can
actually be helpful for other people. It
can actually be a way of connecting with
others over shared experiences. So, this
can actually be something that draws me
into connection rather than keeps me
isolated. But if I had never started
challenging the assumption that nobody
wanted to hear what was inside my brain
or going on in my body in small
deliberate ways, I could never have
found the ways in which my life could
actually be transformed by listening to
the wisdom of my emotions. Now the other
reason why we really start figuring out
who we are through this process is
because our emotions are telling us all
of the time who we are. We just aren't
always listening to them. So before I
got into all of this work, I was really
big into intellectual approaches to
selfidentification. So I loved systems
like MyersBriggs and the ENOG and
essentially any tool for self-exloration
that would give me a cognitive model of
myself that did not require me to
actually tune into my
feelings. And I don't have anything
against those systems, just to be clear.
I think anything that helps people
understand themselves in new ways is
generally a positive thing. But it was
really cool to me to learn that all
along my whole life, there had always
been a part of me that naturally knew,
for example, where my boundaries lay.
That part of me was my anger. And it had
been with me my whole life trying to
give me information about what my
boundaries were, what it meant to
respect myself, and what I was not okay
with. So, there were times in my life
where I felt like I was completely
lacking selfrespect. But that's not
true. My body has always respected me.
It has always known where my nose are
and where my boundaries lie. I just have
not always listened to my feelings and
taken them seriously. But there has been
a woman who respects me inside of me
from the day that I was born. There has
also been a woman who knows how to
grieve and who registers when something
is lost. And that feeling of sadness has
existed in my body my entire life. I
just haven't listened to it. There has
always been a woman inside of me who
knows what I want and what excites me
and what propels me forward in life. I
just have not always listened to those
yes responses. Though to be fair for
myself, that was not a particularly
shame bound one. But for a lot of
people, it is. For a lot of people, the
experience of joy and being drawn into
things is actually something that their
system naturally tries to shut down. And
so the more that we learn about who we
are through direct engagement with and
expression of our emotions, the more we
can find the places in life where we
actually fit. The relationships where we
do not have to numb out all of our anger
to stay in them. The jobs where we do
not feel deadened inside showing up to
them. the lifestyles that celebrate the
types of people we actually are that
provide us with ongoing energy and
ongoing no signals from the body. Yes,
this know that is what our body is
chronically telling us. And when we
learn to live in alignment with that and
make the decisions of our lives based on
that, things like depression, anxiety,
addictions, and compulsions are all
things that we naturally start seeing
less
of. But this brings us to our last point
that I also think is really important to
drive home because I am all about not
idealizing the healing process in and of
itself. No matter how much of this
healing work that you do, if you grew up
with this patterning, there are probably
going to be times where you notice I'm
numbing out a lot again. Even if for a
while I was doing a really good job of
living in alignment with my body and my
instincts, but instead of shaming
ourselves for those habits or those
thought patterns or whatever it is that
we tend to fall into, we can actually
now use them as information. So, we can
look at periods where suddenly we're
abusing food or substances again or
suddenly we're stuck in a lot of
neurotic thought patterns again. We can
use that as information, our body
signaling to us that there is some
strong emotion here that we have not yet
found a way to be in direct contact with
and find right expression for. And so
again, instead of shaming ourselves for
these patterns that arise, we can use
them to our advantage. They can be a
giant X that marks the spot of some
emotion that is begging for our
attention. And then we can finally give
it to it. And so even that dreaded
second layer of parts of ourselves that
we think are so intolerable can also be
something that we learn to appreciate
and make use of because it's like a
signal going off that we are not fully
connected to what's happening in our
bodies and we need to find a way to tune
back into that and notice what our
bodies are trying to tell us. And again,
this is a long process that happens in
starts and stops and rituals and habits
that we develop on route of being able
to check in with ourselves in small ways
until we can live more and more in
alignment with the version of ourselves
that is naturally attuned to who we are
and what we want out of our
relationships and our lives.
All right, I'm going to leave this at
that for today, but as always, any
questions, any comments, anything that's
come up for you as you've gone through
this video, please leave it in the
comment section below. I love you guys.
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other, and I will see you back
here again really soon.
[Music]