Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. For the past couple of months on
this channel, we've been talking about
resilience. And today in particular, I
want to talk about the traits that make
a relationship resilient. Now, I'm going
to be focusing mostly on romantic
relationships in this video, but you can
absolutely translate this to any
attachment relationship that you have
with the exception of maybe a
relationship between yourself and your
own child. So this is any relationship
where both people are kind of mutually
contributing to the relationship and
both people have a desire to do healing
work within it. So one of the questions
that I get asked all of the time is if I
want to work on my attachment style,
should I be doing that work inside of a
romantic relationship or out of one? And
the evergreen response to this question
as far as I'm concerned is it does not
matter. If you want to do this work, you
will absolutely find a way to do it. But
if you are looking to use your
relationship as a resource for doing
attachment work, what we're going to
talk about today are some of the
conditions that kind of have to get met
in order for that to really work. And as
we go through this list, what I want to
be really clear on is that this is not a
death sentence for your relationship if
a bunch of these conditions are not met.
In fact, you can actually take this and
look at it as kind of a guide for which
nutrients your relationship might need
in order to blossom into a place where
it's safe enough for that kind of deep
work to start happening for one or both
people. So again, look at this as
scaffolding, not as a list of things
that you have to already have in place
or else you have no chance. But without
further ado, we will get into 10 things
you might want to check in on if you
want to use your relationship as a
resource in the attachment or trauma
healing process. The first thing, and
this is the one that I believe is the
most important of them all, the
relationship has to be founded on good
faith principles. So what is a good
faith principle? I do have a whole video
about this that I will link in the
description of this one, but essentially
what it means in this context is that
what you say you want from the
relationship is the truth about what you
actually do want. So sometimes we go
into relationships saying things like,
"I really just want a healthy committed
partnership." when actually what we kind
of want is for someone to be
consistently available to us for
co-regulation or for someone to kind of
be in the background of our lives and be
available to us when we want them to be
but not really readjust our lives in any
significant way in order to accommodate
them. At the most basic level, what we
want to be sure of is that we are in a
relationship with someone because at the
least we really like them as a human
being. It is really challenging
sometimes to pick partners from an
authentic place when we are insecurely
attached. I'll never forget coming
across a study that the Gottmans did
where they looked at couples who tended
to be the most resilient and whose
relationships tended to last over time.
And they noticed that it wasn't the
couples who dealt with conflict the
best, which means they weren't always
the most mature during conflict. and
they didn't necessarily have better
conflict resolution skills or even less
conflict than other couples. It was
simply the couples who liked each other
the most and who decided time and time
again, I am willing to sit here and work
through this thing with this person
because I know in my heart of hearts
they matter to me deeply. This is the
first condition that it really helps to
have met if we want to be working on our
attachment wounds inside of a romantic
relationship or any other type of close
committed relationship. We have to make
sure that in good faith we just
authentically like the person and want
to be there. Second condition that needs
to get met. You need to have a safe and
stable enough relationship for both
people to feel comfortable starting to
take new risks in the relationship.
To be insecurely attached means to have
a particular pattern of relating to
people that it's really challenging to
break. And in order to test out those
new ways of showing up and being in
connection with other people, you need
to be in relationships that feel secure
enough to try that out and see what
happens. And a really big problem I see
a lot of people having is they're trying
to do attachment work inside of
relationships that are existentially
unstable. So what I mean by that is
relationships where one or both people
are willing to threaten to break up
every time they get into a fight and do
not have self boundaries around what it
means to provide ongoing stability for
their partner. And the reason this is so
important in this context is because our
attachment wounds are the most online
when we feel threatened. So, if we are
in a relationship where we consistently
feel as though the attachment bond
itself is getting threatened, it's going
to be incredibly difficult to relax our
defenses enough to actually try letting
the other person in in a new way. So,
that's just something you want to check
in on if you're beginning in this
process. Is your relationship safe and
stable enough for both people to feel
like they actually can lean on one
another as a resource in this process
without fearing that they will get left
the second they try something different
from their norm. Third thing that needs
to happen in order for attachment
healing to take place inside of a
relationship is both people need to have
acknowledged a desire to change and
grow. So there needs to be mutual
humility about this process. One of the
most fundamental mistakes I see people
making, and I have a whole video on this
that I will link in the description of
this video, is trying to get their
partner to change their attachment style
without having an explicit conversation
about that as a couple. Attachment
wounds are incredibly
self-protective. And trying to change
someone else's self-protective strategy
is not only incredibly challenging,
borderline impossible to do without
their buy in, it's also not particularly
ethical. If we do not like someone's
attachment style and we want them to
change, but they do not want themselves
to change, that's generally kind of a
self- red flag that we're not
approaching the relationship in good
faith. We are not taking the other
person's word about what is good for
them in their own eyes. Both people have
to have the humility to acknowledge the
problems in our relationship are
two-sided. And if that buyin is not
there, it's probably going to be
challenging to move forward with the
work that you want to do as a couple. If
the work that you want to do as a couple
is healing together. Fourth condition
that kind of bakes itself into the third
one is you need to have empathy for each
other's struggles if you are going to be
using each other as resources for
attachment healing. So if you have
decided that your attachment wounds are
actually kind of noble but they're
causing you distress so you want to
change them a bit but your partner's
attachment wounds are evil. They're kind
of cut from a different moral cloth than
yours. It's going to be really hard to
work on the relationship in good faith.
It is not easy or pleasant to heal from
any side of the attachment spectrum. And
so if you want to do this work with
someone else whose attachment
orientation might be quite polar
opposite to yours, you have to learn to
develop empathy for why their worldview
formed the way that it did. It's
probably because what they learned to do
in attachment relationships was very
adaptive for them early on. And so their
path to healing might look totally
different from yours. and vice versa. If
we do not have empathy for either the
unique challenges our partners have or
the unique process they need to take to
heal those wounds, it's going to become
a coercive relationship very quickly.
So, if we notice that we're harboring
contempt for either our partner's
attachment behaviors or the way that
they're choosing to do this work, we can
use that as something to be worked on in
and of itself. What is it in me that
feels threatened or outraged or whatever
it is by my partner's attachment
patterns? And how can I work with that
contempt to become either more aware of
what my underlying feelings are because
contempt always has something lying
under it and or how do I increase my
compassion and my ability to understand
someone who is very different for me.
Both of those things have gold within
them and can be really wonderful things
to use in the healing process itself.
Fifth thing that really helps and this
is where we're getting into the heavy
lifting is respecting one another's
feedback in this process. So if you want
to do work on your attachment systems
inside of a relationship, this is the
best possible setup you could have if
both of you approach it in good faith
for gaining information about your blind
spots. Very often those who are closest
to us see things in us that we cannot
see on our own. And if you want to use
your partner as a resource for
attachment healing, the one thing you
cannot be is completely and totally
defended against their feedback. Even if
they are not on point about everything
that they say about you, there is very
often deep signal inside of the muddle
of other people's projections and the
way that they see us. So, even the fact
that our partner sees us a certain way
is information, even if it doesn't line
up with what's true about us, right?
Every once in a while, I've been given
feedback where I'm like, "Oh, wow. That
is so not true about me." But does this
mean that I'm coming off in an
inauthentic way to people? If what's
true about me and what I care about and
what my values are are being so grossly
misinterpreted, is it possible that this
is now a growth path for me? Learning to
embody more of what's actually true for
me in a way that gets it more clearly
communicated to other people. And so
there is always something that can be
gleaned from the feedback that we get
from our partners about the way that we
are showing up. Attachment healing
requires us to work with the parts of
ourselves that we feel uncomfortable
with, that we don't like about
ourselves, that maybe are getting in the
way of the types of connections we would
like to have with other people. And if
we are cutting our most valuable and
easily accessible resource for that off
from the get-go, we are robbing
ourselves of a really powerful growth
tool that we could use in the path to
healing our attachment systems. Sixth
thing that is going to need to happen
for attachment healing to take place
inside of a close relationship is both
people are going to need to feel
comfortable stepping into new roles and
trying out new ways of relating to each
other, including ones that feel really
uncomfortable or unnatural. So
essentially what going from an insecure
to a secure attachment relationship
looks like is it means that the power
dynamic in the relationship has to shift
and level out. One of the biggest things
we need to do in the healing process is
look at where do I not naturally like to
step into my power in the relationship.
So on the avoidant side, this might look
like where do I naturally dissociate
from or fail to show up for my own
emotional experience. And on the anxious
side, this might look like where do I
not take full responsibility for the
decisions that I make or the direction
that I want this relationship or my life
to go in or whatever it is. It's going
to be very different person to person.
But essentially, in order for our
relationships to heal into more secure
ones, we have to try on new roles that
feel unnatural to us. What it means to
be insecurely attached is that there are
a few moves we feel really comfortable
making in relationships and we make them
over and over and over again at the
expense often of other moves that would
be more beneficial. So, it's not that we
totally have to get rid of our existing
personalities and preferences. It's that
we need to add in new skills and new
ways of showing up that are able to
balance out that
one-sidedness. And in order to do this,
we need to once again feel comfortable
enough to take a risk on expressing
ourselves in a new way that might feel
really uncomfortable and raw and messy
because we're not good at it yet. And
trust that our partner can handle us in
this way. Which leads us to the seventh
thing that we want to check in on if we
want our relationships to be a place
where deep attachment work can happen.
We need to be ready to be honest with
both ourselves and the other person
about any resistance that might come up
for us both in relation to our own
attempts to try on new roles and do
things differently in the relationship
as well as our partner doing that. So if
the partner who historically has not
taken much of a lead in the relationship
starts taking it, that might bring up a
lot of discomfort for you if you are the
one who prefers to be in the lead and to
be making the major decisions about the
relationship. And you are going to have
to be willing to both acknowledge that
discomfort inside of yourself and
communicate it to your partner. This is
where the really powerful shifts start
happening. It is so insanely vulnerable
to be able to notice when we are
uncomfortable with a power dynamic that
we are a part of and to be able to admit
it to someone and to persist through it
and notice what it feels like for the
relationship power dynamic to rebalance
in new ways. And this might take a lot
of trial and error to get to a point
where you're both comfortable with the
new ways in which you want to show up in
the relationship. If you're the more
anxious party, for example, your
avoidant partner learning the skill of
emotional awareness and self-expression
might actually be destabilizing for you
for a while. If you are used to being
the one who is always going to them for
co-regulation, the moments where they're
disregulated and needing you to help
regulate them might feel really
panicinducing because it forces you into
a new role which is the role of serving
as the solid and secure base for someone
else. But this is where the really deep
work starts to happen. Okay? when we can
try on these new roles, try on ways of
relating to each other that feel
uncomfortable for both people sometimes
and then bond with each other over that
discomfort. This is the beginning of
practicing the secure skill of honesty
and integrity and being able to admit to
yourself and other people when you are
struggling with something that's
unglamorous. Eight thing that it's
really helpful to have in place if
you're going about this process inside
of a relationship is both parties
ideally need to have strong resources or
support networks outside of the
relationship that are keeping them
connected and on the path of the changes
that they want to make inside of the
relationship. There will comes where you
are absolutely just sick of one another.
That is just part of what it means to be
in close connection with someone. And if
you do not have anything externally that
is keeping you aligned with the
relationship's goals, it's going to be
really easy in the moments when you're
frustrated with each other to just give
up on the work all together.
Relationships have the best chance at
thriving when both people have external
support structures in place. And I know
that that's not necessarily easy to get
all at once. And this does not mean that
you have to wake up tomorrow with a
social support network that
realistically it might take years for a
person to build. But it does mean that
ideally your partner is not the only
support that you have in this process.
You have support groups or you have
friend networks or you have at the least
books or podcasts or whatever it is
that's keeping you aligned with the work
that you want to be doing. This also
functions to keep the work that you're
doing inside of the relationship
relatively fresh because both of you can
be bringing things in from outside
sources rather than trying to figure out
everything between the two of you. Ninth
condition that makes a relationship a
really resilient spot to do this work is
that both people have agreed and are
willing to self- advocate within the
relationship. The refusal to self-
advocate and make clear to your partner
what your boundaries are, what your
needs are, what you're uncomfortable
with inside of the relationship. This is
one of the fastest and most insidious
ways to kill a relationship in a lot of
cases while claiming that you are just
serving the health of it by staying
quiet. What tends to happen if one
person is really uncomfortable with
self- advocacy and the other person is
really comfortable stating what they
want and how they think the relationship
should go is that the whole relationship
ends up taking form around one person's
bias because everybody with insecure
attachment has significant biases
online. And the way that you work
through those biases is once again you
go back to that place where you're able
to take each other's feedback seriously
and then you work to arrive in a more
secure and realistic spot as a team. We
need to be able to self- advocate in
order to heal our relational dynamics
and our attachment styles because a
relationship that is secure can only
happen from a congruent place. So, this
is going to be kind of a tough love
moment. But if you are one of those
people who tells yourself that staying
quiet about your needs and about what
matters to you in the relationship is
what makes you a good partner, you are
unfortunately going to need to challenge
that belief. If you are not showing up
authentically, you are not in a good
faith relationship because we are making
that automatic mistake of assuming that
a secure relationship could happen
between two people's masks rather than
two people's realities. It might mean
that you just need to start working to
build skill in the area of disclosing
your needs or disclosing what you're
upset about without being rude,
insulting, or dismissive towards the
other person. This is building the skill
of healthy assertiveness rather than
passiveness or
aggression. And the last thing we are
going to talk about today that can
really help drive a relationship in the
direction of mutual healing is if you
both stay explicitly committed to
staying on the page with each other and
doing repair work even when you don't
want to and even in a situation where it
feels like the relationship is just
going to end. This does not mean that
you have to not break up if what you
both authentically want to do is break
up. But it does mean that you can stay
committed to something like even if we
decide we want to break up, even if we
really want to go our separate ways, we
can make an agreement that we will talk
about that from a place that is calm and
get in some sort of shared reality about
why that's happening before we both walk
away. And the reason this is so
important is because it gives the
relationship that existential security
that we talked about all the way back in
point one to have the safety both people
need to let go of their attachment
strategies a little bit and try on new
things. There was one point in a
relationship where my partner and I just
made the explicit agreement that we
would never break up during a fight. We
would only break up if that's what we
decided we wanted to do from a calm,
regulated place where we would talk
through what was not going well in the
relationship and make an agreement to
break up from the wisest part of
ourselves. And this ended up making
things feel 10 times safer anytime we
had an argument because we both knew
that we could advocate for what mattered
to us without the threat of being
immediately dropped and left by the
other person. Sometimes you think the
relationship is over during an argument,
but if you're willing to go back and
have an honest conversation where
everybody puts their stuff on the table
and talks about what could be done to
fix it, you might find a solution that
you weren't expecting. And so sometimes
in the attachment healing process or
just in the process of having any
relationship, we need to be a little bit
more committed to the process itself
than to the other person. This is going
to save us in the moments when we could
not care less about the other person
because we are just too mad at them. And
if you are a human being, you are
probably going to have moments like
that. And at least trying this out, at
least giving yourself the chance to
experiment with what that might look and
feel like is once again the process of
developing a really secure skill.
All right, I'm going to leave this video
at that for today, but as always,
anything that you have coming up for you
as you've gone through this video, any
questions or most importantly, anything
that you would add to this list, I would
love to see in the comments below. I
love you guys. I hope you're taking care
of yourselves and each other, and I will
see you back here again really soon.
[Music]