Hey guys, I'm Heidi Pribb. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. Today on this channel, we're going
to be talking about how to work with
anxious preoccupation responses. So,
basically moments where your attachment
system is super activated and it feels
like you are not going to be okay until
you can get the attention of and
co-regulation from one of your
attachment figures. And of course, it
does not necessarily mean that you are
triggered or insecurely attached if you
want the attention of and co-regulation
from the people that you love. That is a
very normal part of being alive. But
when we have anxious leaning attachment
systems, so that means either anxious,
preoccupied, or fearful avoidant, we can
sometimes get stuck in certain patterns
of reacting and trying to get our needs
met in certain ways that are not right
for the situation at hand. And so what
earning secure attachment is about is
expanding the repertoire of skills that
we have available to us so that we're no
longer finding ourselves stuck reacting
the same old way to every situation when
there are a whole arsenal of skills that
might help us more. And so that's what
we're going to be focusing on today. How
to find more options for ourselves than
we might currently have available to us.
So, if you've been around this channel
for a while, you know that I spent a lot
of time healing from fearful avoidant
attachment, which means that personally
I had attachment responses in different
directions. So, I dealt with a lot of
deactivation of the attachment system,
which is more akin to avoidance spectrum
types, but I also had certain triggers
that would flip me into more anxious,
preoccupied response patterns. And the
kind of cool thing about getting to
experience the whole range of attachment
responses is that you start gaining some
clarity as you go through the healing
process on what it feels like physically
to be trapped in each response pattern.
And I started personally kind of
thinking of it in terms of where my
center of gravity was in a given moment.
So when I'm insecure patterning, when
I'm feeling that sense of I'm okay,
you're okay, I feel pretty centered in
my own body and my own experiences, I'm
very aware of what's going on for me
internally. And I'm also pretty aware of
the people around me and of my loved
ones and what's going on for them. So
I'm able to both attune to myself and
attune to other people and stay present
with both things at the same time. When
I would flip into a more avoidant or
deactivated response, it felt like my
center of gravity was located inside of
my body. So, I still felt like I was
okay, but I almost needed to push
everybody else and everything else out
of my orbit in order to properly relax
and connect to myself. I needed to be
far away either literally or emotionally
from other people in order to kind of
let down. And then when I was in a more
anxious, preoccupied response pattern,
which is what we're going to be talking
about today, I noticed that it felt like
my center of gravity would actually
become located inside of somebody else.
So, if I was fighting with a partner or
if I was really triggered in some way
that involved another person, it would
feel like the part of me that knows how
to make me feel okay is inside of this
other person, almost like a horcrux,
like I have to find a way to regulate
this other person enough to get them
back in my good graces so that then they
can give me the co-regulation I need to
feel okay again. because my route to
co-regulation is located inside of them.
And so what we're going to be talking
about today is how to work with that
response when it comes up. And
specifically, how to recognize when it
might be time to search for that
co-regulation, which is a perfectly
natural thing to want from a partner or
other close loved ones versus when we're
kind of shooting ourselves and our
relationships in the foot by desperately
trying to get co-regulation out of
someone who is just not able to give it
to us. in this moment and in those
moments how we can start taking care of
ourselves and increasing the options
that are available to us for regulation
in a way that actually serves the
overall health of the relationship. So
the first thing I want to go over here
is what is actually happening for us
when we find ourselves trapped in one of
these response patterns which is
generally a very physiologically
activated state. I find that the easiest
way to think of this is sort of as an
emotional flashback. So when we are
children, we cannot meet our own needs.
We need our parents both for our
practical and physical needs to get met,
but also for our regulation needs to get
met. What it means to have an anxious
attachment style is that generally you
had your emotional needs and your
co-regulation needs met by your parents,
but it was intermittent. So your body
and your mind internalize this message
that my parent will come and care for me
if I can just make my distress clear
enough to them. And so your entire
nervous system wired around making your
distress clearer and clearer in
instances where you are feeling
activated and not okay. And this is
still the same response pattern that
comes online in your nervous system as
an adult when you're flipped into a
preoccupied response. Some part of you
is registering the situation the same
way you did as a child, which is that
you cannot get your own needs met. And
so your only hope is to get this other
person to pay attention to you and to
help you regulate yourself. The problem,
of course, is that this is no longer
true in a technical sense. As an adult,
you have lots of roots available to you
for both fulfilling your resource needs
and regulating yourself. But in those
moments where your system is stuck in
this old response pattern, it can't
remember that you are whatever age you
are. So I remember when I was reading
the book No Bad Parts by Richard
Schwarz, which is a brilliant look at
internal family systems therapy. One of
the things he encouraged us to ask
ourselves when we find that we have a
part of ourselves coming online that is
very distressed is ask that part, how
old do you think I am? Which feels like
kind of a funny question at first,
right? But I found that when I started
asking myself this question, when I was
in an anxious, preoccupied response and
I was feeling obsessed with getting my
partner or whoever else's attention, I
would ask myself, how old do I feel
right now? How old does some part of me
think I actually am in this moment? And
the answer was often pretty young. It
was very rare in those moments that I
was seeing myself as a competent and
accomplished woman in her 20s or 30s.
more often I felt like a tiny child who
was absolutely unable to fend for
herself. And so the work that needs to
get done here when we find ourselves in
these responses is finding ways to
remind ourselves of the age that we
actually are. Because if we can remember
the age that we actually are and really
pull that into our bodies and remind
ourselves that now we are adults who are
not dependent on someone else for all of
our needs. If we can actually embody the
knowing of that, our system is going to
relax and it's going to allow us to deal
with our partner or whoever it is we're
in a conflict with adult to adult
instead of child to parent, which is
likely how the emotional flashback
that's happening in our system is
subconsciously categorizing the
interaction. And that's a big problem
because when we are children, we have
the right to our parents' attention. We
need it on a survival level. And so
there are certain things we will allow
ourselves to do as children to get their
attention that if we bring into an adult
relationship are likely to cause a lot
more problems than they solve. For
example, we might lie about our feelings
in order to get back in the other
person's good graces. So, we might put
aside something we're angry about or not
okay with and go, you know what? Right
now, all I need is to get this other
person's attention back on me. So, I'm
going to fawn. I'm going to tell them
whatever I think it is they want to hear
in order to get back in connection
because it's most important for me to
get regulated. And so if I can just say
whatever I think this person wants for
me in order to get them to like me
again, then at least my body will be
able to calm down and return to
regulation. And this is unfortunately
how we end up abandoning ourselves over
and over and over again inside of
relationships. When we tell ourselves
that being in our partner's good graces
is more important than being true and
authentic to what matters to us. This is
where we end up in relationship dynamics
that start to go sideways because we are
not bringing enough of ourselves into
the equation. Another way we might try
to get our partner's attention that is
not in integrity with ourselves is to
try to make the issue that we want
attention on a relationship issue. So
instead of saying, "Hey, I'm really
stressed out about this," saying
something like, "I think it's really
important for a relationship for us to
focus on this." When that might not be
the most true thing. The most true thing
might be that this is just important to
you, but you're afraid to say that and
be rejected. So, if you can make it
about the two of you rather than
yourself, you're minimizing the chances
of dealing with that rejection, but
you're also minimizing the chances that
you can actually allow what's important
for you to get seen and acknowledged in
your relationship. Another thing that
it's natural to do in a parent child
dynamic, but that does not work as well
in an adultto adult dynamic is amplify
our pain to the point where the other
person has to realize I am a bad person
if I do not care about someone who is in
that much distress. And this is a
subconscious deeply ingrained program
that's going to come online for us. If
we have those anxious preoccupation
responses, it's going to feel really
easy in the moment to instead of
presenting our pain at the level it
actually exists at and giving the other
person the opportunity to meet us there
or to choose not to, the body's natural
response might be to crank the volume up
on that pain and to exaggerate it until
it feels like the other person has to
notice it. And again, this feels
justified when we're in an emotional
flashback because when we are children,
we need our parents attention. The
problem is that as adults, nobody is
required to give us their attention.
People do have the choice to decide not
to care about us, not to love us, not to
attend to our pain, and to walk away
from us in the moments when we need
them.
And the problem is that if we are
willing to use all of these tactics to
get them to stay in situations where
they don't authentically want to be
there, what we are doing is making a
relationship that is wrong for us one
that we are well adapted to. Doing all
of these behaviors are not particularly
vulnerable, even though they might feel
vulnerable in the moment. The vulnerable
thing to do in any relationship is to be
honest and let the other person
authentically choose whether they want
to be with us or not when we are just
clean, clear, and direct about who we
are and what matters to us. Trying to
change ourselves to be more of what they
want so that they stay on the page with
us when we're distressed. trying to make
things about the relationship that are
actually just about what we want and
turning the volume way up on our pain in
the hopes that they will want to attend
to it are all selfabandoning
moves. In every one of these
experiences, we have disconnected from
the adult that lives inside of us and we
have failed to respect that person. And
it is impossible to be in an adult adult
relationship if you are not showing up
as and for your own inner adult. So
that's what we're going to talk about
next. When you find yourself in one of
these response patterns and you're in
one of those emotional flashbacks where
the child in you has taken over and is
desperate to get this other person's
attention no matter what. How do you
instead find your inner adult, your
inner parent who is able to care for
that distressed child who might be
distressed for very normal reasons? It
is very normal to feel distressed and
sad and angry when you're in a conflict
with someone you really love and don't
want to lose. So, it's not that that
child is crazy or wrong. It's just that
that child needs an adult to take care
of them. And if your partner is
triggered themselves, it's highly likely
that they are not going to be available
to do that parenting for you in this
moment. So, what you're going to need to
do is find the skills to self-parent
through those moments and return
yourself to that adult state where you
can handle both your own feelings,
however raw and intense, and recognize
that the person you're dealing with is
another adult who is having their own
experience of this conflict that is
totally separate from yours and that
they probably need to use their own
resources to attend to in the moment.
So, there is something that your system
is getting right in these moments. What
it's getting right is that you are in
pain and you need help attending to that
pain. You need a healthy adult to come
help you self-regulate and figure out
how to deal with what you are feeling
and how to work through the panic that
you're
experiencing. What turns this into a
secure pattern is when you find the
adult in yourself who can do that in
moments of distress. So instead of
getting preoccupied with getting back in
your partner's good graces so that you
can have the care and attention you
need, you have to start turning your
attention to how can I give myself the
care and attention I need. even if they
continue to be a giant about
this forever, and they might, and that
is unfortunately their right as a fully
grown adult. And this is so hard to
grasp in the moment, but it does not
mean that you are condoning the other
person's behavior. It does not mean that
you are allowing yourself to be
mistreated with no consequence. What it
means is that you are going to connect
to the strongest possible version of
yourself who is going to be much more
equipped to handle all of the
disappointment you are feeling about the
relationship dynamic when the time is
right. So I'll give you an example of
this. There is a time when I had gone to
a workshop on trauma that was out of
town. It was a couple of hours by train
from where I was living. And when I went
to this workshop, I was there for about
3 days. It was supposed to be five. But
on the third day, I got really triggered
in a way that I was really struggling to
kind of self-regulate around. And so on
the fourth day, I decided I'm going to
go home a day early because my whole
system was just screaming, "Get away
from this trigger." And so I got on the
train to go back home. And I called my
then partner and I said, "Hey, I'm going
to be home a day early. Would you want
to hang out tonight?" And my partner
went, "Sure, sounds great." And so
sitting there on the train, I wasn't
really attending to my own feelings of
being triggered. What I was thinking
about was how nice it was going to be to
see my partner again. And in my head, my
partner was starting to look less the
way they usually looked in my mind and
more like a hero who was going to be
able to soothe all of my pain around
this. This was all happening totally
subconsciously, right? I wasn't choosing
any of this, but I was kind of
triangulating this workshop I had been
at, which I decided was corrupt and put
together badly, and my partner, who
would of course understand everything
that should have happened at the
workshop and soothe me around how bad it
was. The problem is that 10 minutes
before I pulled into the train station,
I got a text from my partner saying, "I
can't pick you up. I'm having a
situation with my roommate. It's a long
story, but I really need to take a nap.
I'll call you when I wake up.
And I just felt this rage in my system
like how dare you abandon me in this
moment when I'm feeling so disregulated.
And I remember almost seeing my options
branching out before me. One of them
which my very activated system wanted to
take was to just shame and blame my
partner for being a terrible partner.
How dare you blow me off like this via
text? Why didn't you let me know this
half an hour ago? I'm having a crappy
day and you don't seem to care. Right?
All of these emotions that were in my
system naturally wanted to just turn up
the dial and get my partner to pay
attention to me again and apologize for
not coming to the train station and come
pick me up and shower me with love and
affection because I was really
struggling to regulate myself. But
again, luckily I was at the point in my
attachment work where I was also able to
see other options. So, I asked myself,
if I did not have a partner, if I were
completely single, if there wasn't even
a chance to go to this person for
regulation, what would I do to take care
of myself? And I really thought about it
and sunk into that possibility. And I
went, well, I'd probably go home. I
would take a bath. I would call a friend
potentially. I would do some writing. I
would have a really long sleep. And then
in the morning, I would go take myself
out for a nice coffee at a cafe. And all
of these other options started coming
online for me of things that I could do
to regulate
myself. And only once I was able to see
those options could I go back to the
conversation with my partner and be
fully honest with them. So I sent my
partner a text message letting them
know, I'm feeling really disregulated
from the retreat and I didn't make that
clear before. And I hear that you're
also struggling with something with your
roommate and you're feeling a little
off. And what I don't want to happen is
for me to come over and to be in this
state of anger and resentment towards
you, which is currently what I'm
feeling. So, I'm wondering if it makes
sense for us to stay in our own places
tonight and try meeting up tomorrow
instead. And then, because the
relationship that I was in was luckily
pretty secure, I got an immediate call
from my partner and we just kind of
talked out what capacity levels we were
both at and what our best solution was
going to be for the night. But if I had
gone with that anxious gut impulse to
turn the volume way up on my pain and
become critical about my partner's
response rather than open about what was
happening for me and what my feelings
were in an adultto adult way, I would
have been putting them into the parent
position and myself into the child
position and started some form of rift
between us. Because from this position,
it's impossible for them to actually see
me as I am, which is an adult human
being, not a child. And it's impossible
from that position for me to see them as
they are, which is an adult human being
with their own needs and capacities and
triggers, not a parent who's responsible
for regulating me in every moment. And
the reason this is really important to
keep in mind is because it's not that we
want to simply let disappointments or
let downs slide in relationships. We do
want to be talking about the things
we're struggling with. We do want to be
bringing issues up and finding common
ground on the areas that we feel hurt
by. But when we react from our emotional
flashbacks, what we are doing is lashing
out at our partners for not being
perfect parents when that is not what
they are. When we deal with these
issues, we want to be dealing with them
partner to partner. And once again, that
requires us getting into our adult
selves. So, how do we do that? What we
want to get clear on so that we can draw
on it in the moment we find ourselves in
these triggers is what makes us feel
like the most competent, the most
capable, and the most strong versions of
ourselves at the age that we are
actually at. So, there are lots of
things that children cannot do. And in
those moments when we are in an
emotional flashback and we're feeling
regressed, it can actually be very
helpful to do things that physically we
were not capable of as children. So for
myself, if I'm feeling like I'm stuck in
an emotional flashback, the first
question I ask myself is, what could a
7-year-old, if the age that I'm feeling
is 7 years old, not possibly do? I sat
down one day and made a whole list of
those things while I was feeling
regulated. And then when I was
disregulated into an anxious response, I
would start drawing from that list. A
child could not do my job. So as silly
as it sounds, sometimes if I'm feeling
really triggered, I will go do some very
adult, very mundane task like answering
emails or doing the accounting for my
business or getting my taxes organized,
something that objectively a child just
could not do. It is actually very
helpful for me to go engage with for a
little bit if I'm in an emotional
flashback. It proves to me that I am not
seven. I'm a woman in my mid30s and I am
capable of taking care of myself
practically. Other examples of this
could be going grocery shopping and
cooking a meal for myself. These are
things I did not know how to do when I
was a child, especially if it's kind of
like a grown-up meal, you know, like no
mac and cheese here. We're talking
something that it requires adult
cognition to engage with. Another simple
one for me is going shopping. So, taking
that running list of things that need to
get done in my notes section and just
getting through as many of those errands
as possible or going and buying myself
something nice to wear. As a kid, I was
always frustrated that I couldn't buy my
own clothes. And so, this became a very
clear sign when I was an adult that I
was an adult. I could now buy my own
clothes. Another good one can be calling
a friend or calling a loved one and not
talking about the relationship conflict.
Because while it's totally fine and
great practice to be able to co-regulate
with other people, if the goal is
getting reconnected to our adult selves,
we don't want to be bringing that child
state into the conversation in the
moment. So, calling someone who you are
doing a project with and just updating
them on your half of the project or
calling a friend and scheduling a coffee
date later that week. All of these
things can be ways of reminding
ourselves this person, my partner or
whoever it is I'm upset with is not my
only connection to resource. I am now a
fully grown adult who can do things like
earn money, go shopping, take care of
myself, make plans with friends and
loved ones without having to go through
this person the way that as a child you
always had to go through your parent to
get your needs met. So this is about
finding the competent adult inside of
yourself that you are so desperate to
find in your partner and handing your
pain over to them. And only then are we
going to be able to re-engage with our
partners in a way that is actually fair.
Because again, to be in a secure adult
relationship means to recognize that
sometimes you're really going to want
something from your partner and they are
just not going to have the capacity in
that moment to give it to you. It means
to recognize that people are fallible
and they don't always show up perfectly.
We also don't always show up perfectly
and there needs to be forgiveness for
that from an adult to adult place. So
when we can connect to that part of
ourselves, we are ironically giving our
relationships the best chance at
resolving the riffs that come up inside
of them effectively because the adult
inside of us is appealing to the adult
inside of them, which is the only level
at which secure adult relationships can
function. Here's the last thing I'll say
here. If it feels like an act of
self-abandonment to take care of
yourself in all of these moments because
your partner is perpetually unwilling to
show up for you when you tell them about
your pain at the level it actually
exists at a secure person is eventually
going to take that as a clue that they
might be in the wrong relationship. But
again, it takes being centered in that
adult self to be able to recognize that
and to be able to make clear and
self-protective decisions about the
relationships you're in. When we get
stuck in seeing our partner as the only
possible route to getting regulated when
we're distressed, it really limits our
options because we're no longer able to
be clear-headed about how they are
behaving. when we have different options
available to us. That is what it means
to be secure. To be secure means I know
how to go to people for co-regulation
and support. But also I have other
options available to me for how I can
regulate myself in the instances where
the person I want that regulation from
is not able to give it to me. So I have
a wide arsenal of things I can go to and
strategies I can try. And this is
precisely why secure people are a lot
better than those who air more anxious
at leaving relationships where their
needs are not getting met. Because
instead of doing whatever they can think
of to force their partner to regulate
with them when they're feeling
distressed, they choose whatever the
best possible option is. And they start
to recognize over time if 90% of the
time I'm doing self-regulation and only
10% of the time my partner is available
to meet me in the moment when I need
them and co-regulate with me through
difficult moments. That's probably just
not the most supportive partnership and
I might want to go find someone who's
more secure like myself. But again,
they're able to see their partner's
limitations as not a moral insult or
injury, but just as information about
where they're both at and what their
differing needs
are. All right, I think I'm going to
leave it at that for today. But in
summary, I just want to encourage us to
start thinking about these really
intense moments as moments where we have
the opportunity to expand our arsenal of
skills. So as painful as they are and as
challenging as they are, there are also
chances for us to start showing up
differently and giving ourselves the
respect that we need and are so
desperate to find inside of other
people. And this is the exact skill that
gets us moving on that route towards
secure attachment.
All right, as always, any thoughts, any
comments, any questions that you guys
had coming up as you were going through
this video, please leave them in the
comment section below. I love you guys.
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other, and I will see you back
here again really soon.
[Music]