Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. Today on this channel, we're
talking about the avoidant deactivation
response. So essentially, what happens
when your attachment system is shutting
down around a particular relationship
and causing you to subconsciously start
to want to withdraw from it. Now, the
reason I want to talk about this is
because it is not easy to recognize when
this is happening. And this is a big
reason why a lot of people who spend
their entire lives having avoidant
attachment styles often don't even
recognize that that's what they're
dealing with. So it is kind of
quintessential for a lot of avoidance to
self-identify as secure because contrary
to what you might hear in pieces online
that are likely written by people
without avoidant responses, avoidance
are not walking around their lives
feeling consciously terrified of
commitment. Most avoidance who I
personally know or who I've interviewed
when doing research identify more with
phrases like,"I would really like to
find a long-term romantic partner." It
just so happens that very often when
those of us with avoidant patterning get
into relationships, something happens
that surprises us, which is the very
same person who we may have been really
excited to get to know from the get-go.
As the relationship progresses, we start
to realize that they're not actually
that great a fit for us or that at some
point as the relationship goes on, we
just lose our sense of attraction to
people and struggle to get it back. And
what's actually happening in these
scenarios is that our attachment system
is
deactivating. But it's really hard to
catch when that's happening or to know
exactly what that means and what to do
when it happens. So, those are all of
the things that we're going to go over
in this video. I had to kind of have a
reckoning around all of this for myself
at a certain point in my life. So, I
grew up with a fearful avoidant
attachment style and I leaned pretty
heavily avoidant. So, I experienced a
lot more deactivation triggers than
activation triggers, which meant that
for a lot of my life, I found myself in
this type of patterning. I would
initially feel curious about someone,
drawn into wanting to get to know them,
and then at some point my attraction
would go offline. And the point where I
had to reckon the most intently with
this was when I started dating someone
who I had been friends with for years
prior. And I had always thought very
highly of this person as a human being.
I thought highly of their competence, of
their moral code. And then about three
or four months into dating them, I
suddenly felt completely turned off by
them. And that old feeling that I'd had
in so many relationships before of, "Oh,
shoot. I made a mistake on this person.
I didn't see the whole of them. And now
that I know them better, I actually
don't like them was not really
satisfying for me intellectually. I knew
partially because I knew more about
attachment at that point, but also
partially because I had so trusted my
previous assessment of this person for
so long that something weird must be
happening inside of my own emotional
system. If I suddenly feel so turned off
by this person in all of the same areas
where for years and years I respected
them the most. And so I had to start
really parsing apart what might be going
on inside of me that's causing me to
perceive them this differently. And what
I had to recognize was that when we
become deactivated like this as avoidant
attachers, it is not random. Okay? So
it's not a bug in our system that just
comes online and tells us it's time to
stop liking this person. What is often
happening is that something is shifting
inside of us unconsciously. And once
that shift happens, we start running a
different program. So basically, when we
are getting to know somebody, our threat
responses are generally not online. When
we're in kind of the talking phase of a
relationship, when we're maybe going on
dates with someone, getting to know more
about them, there's nothing really at
risk for us. We are, for example, pretty
free to decide how much time and energy
we want to devote to getting to know
someone. We don't yet have any
agreements with them or obligations that
are significant in a way that might
otherwise impose upon our time and
energy. And so the stakes are pretty
low. And when the stakes are low, we're
generally running a program in our
systems and in our minds that is
searching for things like ways in which
we're compatible with someone. So ways
in which we might share the same
interests or like talking to them about
certain things or ways in which we find
them very attractive. And our body in a
relaxed state is free to take all of
this information in without feeling
particularly threatened by the other
person and our growing closeness to
them.
But the more attached we become to
somebody, so the more that our systems
start automatically co-regulating with
this other person, whether we are
noticing that happening or not. So
co-regulation doesn't always mean going
to someone when we're in tears and
having them comfort us. It can be as
simple as our systems growing used to
getting responses from them when we text
them or growing used to them having some
time in their week to spend with us. And
once we start progressing into the phase
of a relationship where our systems are
growing a little bit dependent on
somebody, so they're beginning to
predict that this person is going to be
available to us in certain ways. And
again, a lot of this happens totally
unconsciously. Our bodies just get used
to someone else's presence in our lives.
Once that happens, our attachment
responses come online. And our
attachment responses are going to be
different based on what our attachment
styles are. So if we have a secure
attachment style, what that's going to
mean is that consciously we're going to
recognize, okay, I am wanting to make
more space for this person in my life.
So how am I going to be able to talk to
them about ways of doing that that isn't
disrupting what's otherwise important to
both of us? How am I going to
consciously rearrange my schedule and my
energy to make more room for this person
including the things that I don't like
about the relationship like times when
we are fighting or in conflict. So
there's a very conscious welcoming in of
all of the stuff that comes along with a
relationship when you air more secure
for better and for worse. And there's a
natural expectation that both you and
the other person are going to need to
start more consciously factoring each
other in. However, when we have insecure
attachment styles, whether that is
anxious, avoidant or fearful avoidant,
what often comes online very intensely
when our system starts feeling dependent
on or attached to someone is a threat
response. And what direction that threat
response happens in is going to be
dependent on which of the three insecure
styles you have. So those with anxious
attachment styles generally start
feeling fearful of the bond itself being
threatened. So they might start looking
for ways in which their partner might
not be fully committed to or willing to
show up for the relationship because
their model is oriented towards not
losing the co-regulation that comes out
of a relationship. But if you are
someone with more avoidant patterning,
you're going to have a very different
threat response online because you learn
from a very early age based on the
environment you grew up in. The most
important thing when it comes to staying
in touch with other people is to remain
self-sufficient and able to provide for
yourself well on both a practical level
and an emotional one. Now that of course
doesn't sound like such a bad thing. It
is also part of secure relating to be
able to provide for yourself. But
because securely attached people tend to
be very naturally adept at setting
boundaries clearly. It's not too
threatening when something new emerges
in their life that they need to make
some extra time for because they're
pretty good at communicating here's what
I need to take care of myself and also
here's what I want to give to the
relationship and here's what I want to
take from the relationship. When we have
avoidant patterning the here's what I
want to take from the relationship piece
is not particularly online for us in a
conscious way. And so what might come
online for those of us who air more
avoidant on the attachment spectrum when
a new relationship is starting to take
hold is some version of our brains and
bodies going, "Wait, wait, wait, hold
up. How much of my time and my energy
and my resource is this relationship
going to demand of me?" And now we're
moving away from that program that is
looking for all of the things it's
excited and curious about relative to
the other person. and our threat
response system is online and what it is
now hyperfocusing on are things like is
my partner independent enough or are
they going to be relying too heavily on
me to get their needs met and if I don't
know how to set boundaries about that or
clearly communicate what I can and can't
do in relationships does that mean that
I'm going to have to start sacrificing
the things that are important to me and
taking time away from the things that
keep me regulated to attend to and care
for them our system might also be
logging things like how does this
relationship look to the outside world?
Are there things about them that might
kind of threaten my social standing if
other people don't like my partners? And
this one kind of sounds narcissistic
from the outside, but it is something
that human beings are pretty much always
tuned into is how we're being perceived
by our social groups, right? And that
does go a long way when it comes to
securing resource. So, if you heir on
the side of the attachment spectrum
where securing resource for yourself is
of the utmost important to you in
staying regulated, that's another area
in which you're going to be scanning for
threats. And three, though this list
could go on, is that you're also going
to be looking for ways in which this new
person and the ways they want to
integrate themselves into your life
might disrupt your routines and your
ability to make decisions for yourself,
which subconsciously feels like a threat
to your ability to keep yourself
regulated. Because those of us who air
more avoidant tend to do a lot of
self-regulating through having specific
routines or specific activities that
keep us regulated without us needing to
go to other people for regulation. So,
at this point in a relationship where
the anxious party is going to be
scanning for ways in which they're
afraid that the connection is going to
get threatened and where a secure person
is going to be looking for ways to very
consciously and intentionally integrate
the relationship into their life,
including the parts of it that they
don't like, the avoidant system is
likely going to be very active, scanning
for any threats that the relationship
might pose to their ability to keep
themselves feeling okay and resourced.
And when the brain is in this threat
response state, it is not paying
attention to all the things that you
were paying attention to previously,
which are the things you like about the
person, the things that you want to keep
in your life, the ways in which you are
curious about getting to know them. It's
kind of like how if you're being chased
by a bear in the forest, you're not
going to be standing there admiring the
beautiful views around you. The views
might be beautiful and in this case,
your partner might be a wonderful person
and you may have been right while
getting to know them about all of the
things you like and admire about them.
But now that your threat response is
online, all you are concerned with is
mitigating that threat. And this is the
same thing that happens for us when our
attachment responses come online as
avoidant attachers and our bodies log
that we're starting to become used to
someone or dependent on them in some
ways. our brains are suddenly going to
get really busy fixating on ways in
which that relationship could be a
threat to us. The beautiful scenery is
still there. We're just not focusing on
it because our brains are preoccupied
with a different system. And when our
brains are preoccupied with that system,
guess what? We're logging and paying
conscious attention to all of the things
we don't like about our partners. all of
the ways in which they are going to be a
threat to our ability to stay regulated
or secure resource for ourselves or on a
more base level what the cost of being
in this relationship is going to be. Now
this can happen either at the point in
the relationship where you start feeling
attached or it can happen down the line
if your circumstances change in such a
way that there's now a reorganizing of
how much space the relationship needs to
take up in your life. So, for example,
maybe the attachment relationship that
you had has been perfectly comfortable
for a while, but now it's time to move
in together. Or maybe you're talking
about starting a family now. Or maybe
your spouse has lost their job and
suddenly they're home all the time.
Anytime there's a significant disruption
to the relationship dynamic that
threatens to rearrange the way you spend
your time and energy, this response can
come online. So, this is just a helpful
thing to stay aware of. Anytime I'm in a
relationship and I notice myself being
in this kind of patterning where
suddenly I just feel turned off by the
person I'm with or I just don't like
being around them the way I used to. I
ask myself, is there something that has
happened recently that has changed our
level of dependency on each other? And
if so, is it possible that what I'm
going through right now is a
deactivation response where my brain is
running a different program that is
incomplete? Because again, to be secure
means that you absolutely have that
threat response system online, but
you're also able to run that original
program at the same time. So your brain
is simultaneously processing in a secure
state what you like about the person and
the relationship and the ways in which
you want it to continue and what the
cost on your time and energy is going to
be of continuing that relationship. And
so what happens in secure patterns is
that again we go into conscious and
intentional negotiations about how we're
going to make the relationship work best
for both people. But if this is all
happening unconsciously for you if you
air more avoidant, it can be a lot
harder to recognize when this is going
on and to make clear to both yourself
and your partner what your needs are in
this scenario. And in the final part of
this video, we're going to talk more
about how to draw these things together.
But I also want to acknowledge another
reason why we might go into deactivation
responses as avoidant attachers. Another
key reason why this might happen, why we
might suddenly feel ourselves feeling
turned off or disconnected from our
partners is that they may have done
something recently that either offended
us, disappointed us, or hurt us that we
did not notice consciously. So to have
an avoidant attachment style generally
means that you grew up in an environment
where attachment seeking behaviors were
predictably met with hostility. So, what
does that mean? It means that when you
were young and you went up to your
parents and showed things like
vulnerability or a desire for support
and connection, your parents didn't
necessarily know how to respond to that
in a way that was attuned and loving.
And they may, especially if they had
something like more avoidant attachment
online for themselves, have actually
detached from you as a child in those
moments. And so what your body and your
system instinctively learned was if I am
hurt, if I feel vulnerable, if someone
has done something that's let me down,
if I go to someone and express any of
those feelings, I'm going to get
rejected. And so the body learns to
start suppressing those feelings even
for you. So it's not that you are
walking around feeling hurt and wounded
and just not admitting it. It's that
when you get hurt or disappointed or let
down, your body has effectively learned
to suppress your conscious experience of
those emotions and what comes out
instead is feelings of contempt. So, I
feel like this is one that it is easiest
to explain with examples. So, I very
recently became aware of the fact that
it hurts my feelings when people do not
keep their promises to me. So, if
somebody tells me they're going to do
something or that there's some way in
which they're going to show up for me or
for the relationship and then they do
not take the actions they said they
would take, that makes me feel hurt.
Which sounds very clean and simple and
easy to understand. Except for the
majority of my life, anytime someone
made me a promise and then didn't follow
through on it, I would not experience
feelings of pain and disappointment. My
brain would immediately go, "This has
nothing to do with me. this other person
simply cannot get it together, doesn't
have any follow-through, and basically
there's just no reason why you should
ever choose to try to depend on them.
And the reason my brain goes to this
programming is because it is an
invulnerable response. If my system is
incapable of letting me feel my
vulnerability and my pain because it's
logged that as something that always
leads to rejection and hostility, it
still needs to process that feeling
somehow and it still needs to create the
necessary boundaries between myself and
this other person so that the hurt does
not continue to happen. So a good way
for me to keep that in my awareness is
to look down on the other person.
Because when I am looking down on
someone, it means that I am not going to
be very vulnerable with them. It means
that I'm not going to depend on them for
things. And so all of these responses
that the secure system would handle and
move through intentionally and
consciously, the avoidance system is
kind of running unconsciously. So now in
a state where my patterning heirs a lot
more towards secure, if I feel
disappointed or let down by someone, I
might have that contempt response come
online and I might have those judgments
come online and I use that as a cue to
recognize there's probably some hurt
here for me. And then I can get in touch
with that pain in my system. I can let
the other person know that I felt
disappointed or let down or hurt by
them. And I can see whether or not we
can work through that together. and do
some repair in the relationship and set
some new shared expectations explicitly.
When I can do that, what I can also do
is maintain my image of my partner as a
competent person. But when I don't even
give myself the opportunity to
experience my own feelings around it and
I instantly write them off as
incompetent, then what happens is I
start treating them as though they are
incompetent. And when you are treating
someone as though they are incompetent,
what that tends to do is disregulate
them because nobody likes feeling like
they're being spoken down to or like the
other person is not handing them any
real responsibility. And so we're no
longer giving our partners the
opportunity to even try to rise to the
occasion of meeting our standards. We've
just written them off entirely as
someone who could. And this has been one
of the most transformative things for me
in my attachment healing journey is
learning that the more I get in touch
with my own vulnerabilities and the
places in which I've been let down or
disappointed by people and don't allow
myself to write those people off as
incompetent, but instead go to them and
share my pain and give them at least the
chance to respond to that. And if they
respond to it incompetently, that's
fine. but it gives it the opportunity to
actually get repaired if the other
person does respond to it with
competence and compassion. And much much
more often than I have expected, that's
exactly how things have gone. So, this
brings us to the last point that I want
to go over today, which is that the
difference between an avoidant
attachment system that is so heavily
focused on threats to self-regulation
when getting into a relationship and the
secure system, which logs those very
same threats, is that the secure person
is able to see their relationships as a
resource.
If you are almost never going to your
partner with your own needs, your own
vulnerabilities, what you want out of
the relationship because those things
are not apparent to you. It is always
going to feel like relationships are
taking from you without giving anything
back. It's only when we learn to see our
relationships as resources in and of
themselves that it starts to make sense
to make more conscious room for them in
our lives. So, when I can start keeping
both of those programs online at the
same time, that initial program of I
really love what it feels like to talk
to this person for hours. I really love
how attracted I feel to this person. I
really love the way in which they do X,
Y, or Z or the curiosity they have
around these topics. When we can keep in
our conscious awareness all of those
things and how much we are being
influenced by them for the better while
keeping in mind what the cost of the
relationship is. We can now make more
intentional choices about it because we
can concretely see for ourselves that
yes, we might need to be trading off
some of the time or energy that we would
otherwise spend on our own hobbies or
routines, but we're getting something in
return for that. It is not all give no
take. We have to learn to be more
conscious as avoidants of what we are
taking from relationships in order to
appreciate them enough to want to make
the sacrifices that are necessary for
keeping relationships healthy. And so
this is a tuning in process to what our
own needs and wants are that are
relational. So what can we get from
being in partnership that we could not
get on our own? and are we willing to
trade some of our independence in order
to receive that? The more conscious we
can be about the tradeoff, the less
bitter and contemptuous we're going to
be because we understand the return
we're getting on our own investment in
the
relationship. Okay, I think that's all
I'm going to say for today on this
topic, but in general, any thoughts,
feelings, questions that are coming up
for you as you've gone through this
video, please do leave in the comment
section below. As always, I love you
guys. I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other. And I will
see you back here again really soon.
[Music]