Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. This month on this channel, we've
been talking about resilience. And today
in particular, I want to talk about an
emotion that we don't always associate
with resilience, but in that my mind
absolutely cannot be parsed apart from
it, which is the emotion of grief and
what it actually means to go into grief
as opposed to resisting grief or go
prolonging it indefinitely. And the
reason why this topic is so interesting
and so alive for me personally is
because this has been one of my own
greatest arcs in my journey of healing
from the fearful avoidant attachment
style to a more secure system. So early
on in my life there were a plethora of
reasons why I found it really hard to
let go of anything. I would neurotically
hold on to relationships that I should
have gotten out of way long ago or I
would jump out of things too quickly and
then go back into them not understanding
my own patterning. And it wasn't until
the past yearish of my life where I
found myself dealing with some really
raw grief experiences that I was able to
actually understand the difference
between grief when it is touched
directly and moved through headon and
neurotic grief, which is what I spent a
lot of my life kind of circling around.
So, what we're going to do with this
video is first look at what it means to
experience grief directly and cleanly.
And then we're going to go over what
things might keep us in a pattern of
prolonged grief. I was recently reading
the book called The Grieving Brain by
Mary Francis Okconor. And something she
dropped in a casual couple of paragraphs
in the book that absolutely rocked my
world was this idea that ruminating on
grief is actually the avoidance of it.
So when we are stuck in patterns of
trying to figure out what went wrong or
figure out how we could have avoided the
loss or patterns of thinking that we
cannot and will not ever be happy again
until the person who has wronged us in
some way comes back and makes it right.
All of these forms of rumination are
actually a way of resisting the raw and
direct experience of grief and pain.
Staying fixated on a mental process can
feel like moving through grief and going
on with our lives. But it is not the
same thing as being present with the
emotional experience as it is happening
of loss and what's coming up for us over
and over again daytoday in relation to
that loss. So the first thing we're
going to go over is what it means to
actually be grieving. So if you are
experiencing clean, direct,
uncomplicated grief, what is actually
happening inside of your system? The
idea we want to be keeping in mind as we
go through this is if we have a
heartbreak or a grief that does not seem
to be healing within what we consider to
be the normal time frame. And there is
of course no perfect time frame that we
can map out and say everyone's grief
should happen within this length of
time. But generally, we have an idea for
ourselves of when it feels like it's
been too long and this thing just
doesn't seem to be healing right. Kind
of like if you have a broken bone, you
get a sense over time if the bone is
actually healing and you're actually
getting stronger or if something might
be going wrong with the healing process
that's keeping you from regaining your
strength. So what we're trying to parse
apart here is is the thing that we are
feeling that is taking so long to heal
grief or is it something else? So here
are four things that happen when we
experience grief directly. The first
thing that happens anytime we lose
someone who we are used to having in our
lives is that we experience a chronic
disappointment of our expectations.
So basically the brain wires not only
around the real-time interactions that
we have with the people in our lives but
neurons also fire in a particular way
when we are expecting to have a certain
interaction with someone. So for example
I once had a long relationship where
every night around 9:00 my partner would
call me and we would talk on the phone
for a couple of hours usually before we
went to sleep. And when we broke up, I
noticed that every night at 9:00, there
was a part of my body that was expecting
that call to come in. So there were
neurons firing that had mapped out what
to expect on a day-to-day basis from
being in relationship with this person.
These are the same type of neurons that
fire in our brain to keep most parts of
our reality consistent. I expect that
when I open my bedroom door every
morning, my hall is going to be there.
My brain is already preparing itself
while I'm opening that door to see and
smell and hear the creaking floorboards
of that hallway. It would be a shock to
my system if I opened my bedroom door
one day and the hallway was gone. And
the same thing happens in our bodies
when we get really used to interacting
with a person and learning to expect
consistent interactions with them which
suddenly are no longer happening. So,
the early stages of grief are kind of
like chronically reaching the last stair
of a staircase, thinking there's one
more, going to step on it, and having
our foot kind of drop onto the floor
below us. It's surprising because our
systems are adjusting to this person no
longer being around. And this is going
to happen over and over and over again
in tiny moments as we move through the
grief process if we are experiencing
grief cleanly. The second thing that
happens when we are grieving someone,
especially if it's someone who we have
spent a lot of physical time around, is
that our bodies have to physiologically
adjust to the lack of co-regulation that
we had gotten used to. Our bodies and
minds are constantly using whatever they
can from the world around us to stay in
regulation. And so even tiny things like
hearing your partner sigh before falling
asleep at night can be signaling to your
body moment to moment now it's time for
you to fall asleep. There are these
little things that your body has become
accustomed to and is regulating around
in subtle ways. For a lot of years I
shared an apartment with someone who was
my closest friend. And every evening at
some point we would come home, see each
other, tell a little story about our
days. And it would always end with us
laughing because we had this brilliant
shared sense of humor. And I noticed
once that person moved out and I stopped
living with them, it felt like I was
holding a huge amount of tension in my
body all the time. And I couldn't really
figure that out until I realized my body
had gotten used to having that release
of laughter every evening when this
person would come home. And without that
person around, the tension that I would
usually hold in expecting to be
regulated through that release was just
building and building and building and
not getting let out. And once I could
recognize that, I could work with it.
But this is just another example of how
our literal bodies, the way that we
physiologically hold ourselves
unconsciously co-regulates with another
person. And then when that person is
gone, especially if they are suddenly
and unexpectedly gone, whether that's
through death or through a breakup or
through some other separation that we
didn't see coming very clearly or that
we weren't associated to when we did see
it coming. This can leave us in a state
of chronic low-level physiological
dysregulation until we spend enough time
without that person in our presence that
our bodies start finding new things to
regulate around. The body naturally
adapts to change whether we consciously
notice it or not. So these two parts of
the grief process do tend to naturally
take care of themselves in the sense of
our minds eventually stop anticipating
that someone is going to walk through
the door if it's been a really long time
since they have. And our bodies do the
same thing. Our bodies are always
unconsciously adapting to grief. But
that doesn't mean that our conscious
minds are always doing the same thing.
The next thing that can be a really
complicated part of the grief process is
parsing apart how much of the identity
that you have come to form with another
person. You are going to carry on inside
of you and how much of it no longer
applies to you. So when we get close to
anybody, we develop this kind of idea of
not just who am I and who are they, but
who are we together? How do we uniquely
combine to create this shared
relationship identity? And this is a
really healthy and normal part of
attachment relationships. This does not
mean that you forget who you are in
every relationship. It does not mean
that you don't hold your own identity
sacred. It just means that there are
ways in which we come to understand
ourselves through the ways in which
someone else mirrors us back to us. But
when an attachment relationship ends, it
can be really challenging to kind of
figure out how much of the parts of
myself that I loved expressing through
that other person were just parts of me
that I could go bring into other
relationships versus what about our
dynamic was special and unique and
impossible to replicate again. And it
takes time to sort out what about that
we want to keep and bring forward with
us versus what was unique to our dynamic
with that person that we want to leave
in the past. But once again, moving
through that is a natural part of the
grief process and of realizing who we
are after loss, which brings us to the
fourth component of grief that we're
going to talk about today, which is the
process of letting go of the future that
we had imagined with this other person.
Even if that isn't necessarily something
like a romantic future, it could be
something like losing a parent and
realizing that they're not going to be
there at these milestone moments of your
life that you always just assumed your
parent would be there for. In the
romantic sense, it might mean letting go
of the idea that we are going to marry
this person or grow old with them or
have children with them or any other
number of milestones, whether
traditional or completely unique to the
two of you, that some part of you was
enjoying the experience of looking
forward to. A big part of the grief
process is letting those visions of the
future
dissolve, arriving back in the present,
however crappy the present is. And the
present usually feels pretty crappy when
we are going through grief and letting a
new future emerge out of that ability to
stay present with what is happening now.
Now that that person is gone. And this
is where I think grief either goes
really right or really wrong. If we can
stay in that present and if we can
actually acknowledge and accept that the
future we wanted is gone, it gives us
the opportunity to be with the absolute
crap that is the present. Because again,
I'm not going to sugarcoat this. Moving
through grief, constantly having our
expectations disappointed, having our
body be in a chronic low-level state of
disregulation, it is not fun. It is
hellish. But it also allows us to attune
to what is happening in the present. And
over time we build a future out of those
present moments that we stay attuned to.
But what happens if we struggle with the
experience of presence and this is where
we're going to start talking about what
can go wrong in the grieving process. So
for myself for the majority of my early
life I was absolutely terrified of being
in the present moment. I was very
disembodied. I was very afraid of
feeling my feelings as they arose
because I was pummeled with toxic shame
and thought that my own feelings were
wrong and bad. And so my number one
coping mechanism for dealing with
basically my entire life was staying out
of the present moment and escaping into
fantasies about the future or just
otherwise trying to push myself
aggressively towards goals that kept me
perpetually in relationship with the
future and out of relationship with the
present. So, the first thing I always
want to encourage people to look at if
they're really struggling to let go of
something or someone or feel or move
through some form of grief is how good
are you at staying present? How able are
you to accept that what you are feeling
in a given moment is real and important
even if you don't understand it? And if
you have a whole bunch of defense
mechanisms on top of your feelings and
sensations and present moment
experiences because you believe that
some aspect of them is wrong or bad to
have, it's going to be really hard to
stay present enough with grief in order
to start moving through it and finding
what comes next.
So, we're going to talk a little bit
more about that at the end of this
video, but I just want to plant the seed
in our heads right now that generally
the degree to which we are able to
actually get over things and move on
with our lives is the degree to which we
can be accepting of and in relationship
with the present moment and all of our
feelings and sensations that come up in
the present. The more afraid of the
present moment we are, the harder it's
going to be to let go of things,
especially if those things are ideas
about the future that we use to
self-regulate in the present moment
because being in the present feels
perpetually intolerable. I do have a
video about that that I'm going to link
in the comments of this one because I
have a feeling it might be resonant for
some of the people who are drawn to this
video. But the next thing we want to
look at is whether we are holding on to
our mental model of someone. So that
means this person has left our lives but
we are still in deep connection with the
idea of them inside of our minds. We
still have conversations with them in
our head or we still think chronically
about how angry we are at them and how
we want to get revenge on them or how we
just wish that they would come back and
love us again or whether we're going to
see them again in the future. If we are
having this ongoing relationship with
them that we cannot seem to end, one
thing it might be worth asking ourselves
is, what do I think it means about
myself if this relationship just ends
and is permanently
over? So early on in my life, one of the
biggest pains that I carried through the
majority of my life was feeling like I
did not fit in even a little bit with my
family of origin. I felt like an
outsider. I had a lot of shame around
the person that I was and the meaning
that I made around feeling like the
black sheep in my family. And then in my
late teen years, I met someone who
shared a lot of the same values as my
family and who in a lot of ways reminded
me of my family culture, but who
absolutely adored me. And this person
and I fell very in love. But as our
relationship progressed over the years,
it became clearer and clearer to both of
us that we were not aligned enough on
what we wanted out of life to be good
long-term partners for each other. And
so we broke up and then we got back
together and then we broke up and then
we got back together. And this happened
over and over again for a period of 8
years. And no matter what happened, I
just could not figure out why it was
that even though it was so clear to me
that this person was not the right fit
for me long term, I could not let go of
the idea that I needed them in my life.
And at some point years later, it
occurred to me that the reason I'd had
so much trouble letting that person go
for good was because they were in my
mind the most salient piece of proof I
had that I was a person who was worthy
of love. Because they were the first
person truly I think in my life who I
ever really allowed in and let myself be
deeply loved by. I also kind of
mistakenly thought that my ability to be
loved was located inside of them and
that if he were gone, I would just be
alone and unloved for the rest of my
life because some part of him loving me,
I believed deeply had been a mistake.
And it was a mistake that I thought
would never get made again. So, if I
wanted to be loved, period, I had to
keep this person in my life. And this
might not be the story that you have
about whatever loss it is that you're
experiencing. But what we want to start
doing is searching for those stories
that we might be telling ourselves,
whatever they are. This is a confusion
in our shared identity with someone.
Right? I later on after a lot of therapy
and soularching realized that I was
absolutely capable of loving someone
else deeply and being loved deeply by
someone else. It just took me a long
time to get there.
But what often happens when we have
these really deep wounds, these feelings
of I am wrong or bad in some way. I am
unworthy of love. I do not deserve love
from people. When we believe that we
have found the exception to that rule
inside of another person, it can be
really hard to let go of that person
even if the relationship no longer makes
sense. And in order to let go of them,
what we have to do is heal that wound.
go right to the source and find a way to
stop believing that this thing we had
with this other person was the exception
to some deep and terrible truth about
ourselves. And I want to just quickly
run through what this looks like very
explicitly because I believe it's such a
big sticking point for so many people.
So let's say you have this belief
something like I am unlovable at my core
and then someone comes along and loves
you and you believe okay there is now
one exception and then that person
leaves. Now here are the options it
might feel like you're left with in your
system. One is that you can accept that
this thing about you is true. You are
unlovable and now that this person is
gone you will forever be unlovable once
again. The problem with this is that
your system is going to have a really
hard time accepting it. Both because
it's untrue and also because it is just
an intolerable thing to think about
yourself. So your system is going to be
fighting really hard to get you to
believe no that's not true. And if the
only proof it has is located inside of
that other person, you're going to stay
really attached to the idea of that
other person and of keeping the
relationship that you had with them
alive. Another thing you could do in
this scenario is go out and test your
hypothesis. So go, okay, if I'm
unlovable, why don't I go try dating
some more people or getting close to
some more people to test whether or not
that's true and see if they love me. But
if that wound is big enough and
allconsuming enough, it's going to feel
threatening as hell to try that. Because
again, any confirmation that that's true
is going to be way too overwhelming for
the system to handle. And again, most of
these core wounds are not true. They are
just things we wrongly internalized from
a very young age. The other option is,
of course, to stay in this relationship
in our minds with our exes or with
whoever it is that has left our lives
and just keep thinking about either how
angry we are with them and how they
really do owe us an apology because
that's our mind's way of trying to get
them to come back. If we can invent a
task that we believe we will not be okay
until they come along and do for us. Now
what are we doing? We're keeping the
idea of them in our orbit. And what does
the idea of them represent? If it
represents that we are okay in this way
in which we fear we are fundamentally
not okay, it's actually going to be a
lot easier to stay in an imaginary
relationship with that person than it's
going to be to let them go and to
confront that core
wound. Which leads us to the last
option. Actually go to the core of that
wound and heal it. This is almost always
the advice that I have for people who
are struggling with limrance. If you
don't know what that term means, I'll
link a video in the description of this
one. But a kind of short form for it is
romantic obsession. The way out of
limrance is to heal your self-esteem
wounds. And that's very often also the
way out of prolonged grief, to heal
whatever wound we have that is telling
us we cannot and will not ever again be
okay if this person does not come back.
So, this is very tender work and this is
the kind of thing that you probably want
to work with someone on. So, going to a
therapist, doing self-development work,
even reading books on this and just
getting more acquainted with where your
core wounds might be can go a long way
in you being able to address them
directly and let go of the ways in which
you've projected the healing of that
wound onto another person. A lot of the
time, healing these beliefs we have
about ourselves is an interpersonal
process. We need to see the parts of
ourselves that we believe are so
shameful reflected back to us in a way
that lessens our anxiety around those
parts being seen. That's just part of
the healing process. But we never need a
specific person to do that. There are
always options available in terms of
people we can work with, friends we can
go to, loved ones we can confide in that
can give us those experiences that will
help heal those interpersonal wounds. It
never has to be one person. It might
just take some time for you to figure
out what it was that you saw in that
other person that made you feel
comfortable enough to open up to them in
a particular way and helped you build
some evidence against the case of that
core wound. And when you realize that
that is a way you could in theory once
you are ready open up to someone else
again in the future now you have the
blueprint available to you for gathering
more evidence that works against those
core wounds. So even these really
painful losses can be things that we
mine for absolute gold. The next thing
we want to look at if it feels like we
just cannot seem to move on from a
heartbreak or from the end of some
relationship, whether that is to death
or a breakup or whatever it is, is we
might want to consider that what we are
dealing with is not just the pain of
loss, but the encountering of our own
shadow. So, I'm not going to go too deep
on what I mean by the term shadow, but
essentially the idea here is that
sometimes to process in a way that is
true why a relationship ended or why a
death happened or anything in that
category, it means that we must confront
an idea we have about how the world
works or about how we wish the world
worked that this loss is forcing us to
confront is not true. So, I'll give you
an example of this. While I was on this
healing journey to go from fearful
avoidant to secure, which I decided at a
certain point in my life was going to be
my main focus. Nothing was going to get
in the way of me finding my way out of
these self-destructive patterns. I had
this idea in my mind that once I arrived
at secure attachment, I would have great
relationships that would have no
problems and that would last for the
rest of my life. And when I finally got
to a point where I had, by almost any
objective measure that I could figure
out, reached secure attachment, I had
the onetwo punch of my closest friend
and the person who I was very in love
with leaving my life within the span of
a couple of months. And this absolutely
splintered my worldview. My worldview
was that if I could take responsibility
for everything that I did wrong inside
of my relationships, which as a fearful
avoidant I really struggled with early
on in the process of attachment healing.
If I could just be hyper responsible
about my own role in relationships, if I
could develop my integrity, if I could
learn to treat people right, then I
would not experience loss anymore. And
what that very annoying one-two punch
that life dealt me forced me to reckon
with is the fact that I can only control
my half of relationships. That is all I
will ever be able to do. I cannot behave
perfectly enough to make anybody stay in
my life if what they authentically want
and need for themselves is to leave it.
And in fact, the secure thing to do in
those circumstances is to let those
people go and to feel the grief and pain
and disregulation of losing them and to
accept that it has happened and move
forward with my own life in a new way
that is not what I wanted or
expected. But let's say I had wanted
desperately to cling to my old
worldview, which is the idea that if I
could just be perfect enough, I would
never again have to experience grief or
loss. In order to keep that worldview
alive, I would have had to do some
neurotic thing like focus intensely for
years at a time on every single thing
that I had done wrong that could
possibly have driven those people away.
And then I would have had to chase after
them endlessly and refused to be happy
or satisfied with my own life or form
new relationships until I had gotten
them to come back and love me again.
Because again, that's what happens when
we cling to these worldviews. We can
spend our entire lives trying to get the
circumstances of our lives to conform to
our worldviews rather than accepting
that sometimes the circumstances of our
lives are actually there to change our
worldviews and to get us to accept
truths about reality that we do not want
to accept but that go on being true
whether we accept them or not. If you
believe that loss and grief always mean
you have done something wrong, what do
you do instead of experiencing them? You
fixate on how to improve yourself in a
scenario where actually sometimes life
just deals you a crap hand. And that
truth is part of the human experience.
And that part of the human experience
allows you to connect with other people
on this very human thing. And so the
more I was willing to learn the lesson
that life had dealt me and connect with
other people on it, the more I found
that I was actually able to have deeper
relationships on the other side of those
losses. Which is once again why staying
in the present is so immensely important
for grief. The next thing we might want
to check in on if we're struggling to
move through grief is to what degree we
have unexpressed emotions towards the
person that we're grieving, whether they
are alive or dead. A concept that
absolutely changed my life was several
years ago in a radical honesty workshop.
One of the trainers said that often when
we withhold appreciation, when we don't
tell people what we love about them or
the ways in which we're thankful for
them impacting our lives, what happens
is that that appreciation gets
transformed into an expectation of how
we would always like for them to behave.
And the way to not fall into this trap
of kind of inventing the way we want
people to behave in the future,
including when they are long gone from
our lives and then getting perpetually
disappointed by our own expectations, is
to directly and specifically express
that appreciation if we can to that
person, if not in the presence of
another witness who can hold that space
for us to have our appreciation seen.
So, this might sound absolutely
ridiculous, but there was one point
where I was really struggling to get
over a breakup. And I realized that a
really big part of what I was struggling
with was that I had so many things I was
excited for in the future with that
person. And there were so many ways in
which I felt like they had changed my
life and changed my experience of myself
by being present with me in areas that
in the past I had struggled to stay
present with in myself and them being a
part of my life in that way had
fundamentally changed my experience of
being a human being. And so even when
the relationship ended about as badly as
a relationship could end and I was
feeling totally abandoned and like I had
no idea how to move through my grief, I
one day sat down and wrote a huge email
to this person that just included every
way in which I appreciated them for what
they had once brought into my life. And
then I sent it. And it was incredible
how much releasing that into the
universe, even though they never
responded to that email, allowed me to
set myself free. Because now I was
making clear to myself that yes, these
parts of me that I now love so much, I
could once only access with this person,
but now they're mine. Now that I have
fully thanked and let go of this person
for their contribution to my
self-concept, I am simply left with
these parts of myself that are now mine
to own and to go on with. And the same
can be true of anger. So I've had
another scenario where I thought that I
was so torn up about this relationship
and in such a state of grief about it.
And then in a coaching session, I was
sitting with my coach talking about how
torn up I was and how helpless I felt to
move on from the relationship. And the
coach went, "Have you tried getting
really angry at this person inside of
your mind?" And I went, "No, I don't
feel anger. You're not hearing me. I
just feel sad and withdrawn. And in
fact, I'm quite proud of myself for
feeling sad because it's historically
been very difficult for me as an
emotion." And the trainer went, "Just
try it. put a chair in the corner of the
room and get really angry at this
person. Just let everything out. Yell at
them. Tell them what you resent about
them, why you never want to see them
again. And I did this and it totally
allowed me to stop ruminating over that
relationship. A lot of the things that
live on in our system keep us from
accessing grief is simply unexpressed
emotion. Whether we choose to express
that to the person directly or in the
presence of someone else who can witness
it like that coach is totally up to us
and what feels right for the given
circumstance. But sometimes when we have
strong emotions that we are withholding,
we simply need to let them out of our
bodies and have them be witnessed by
someone. And that in and of itself can
go a really long way in returning us to
presence and allowing that grief process
to begin. Now, the last thing we're
going to talk about today, because this
has been a very long video, is the idea
that sometimes when we're not moving
through grief fast enough by our own
standards, it might be because we are
simply not ready to step into that next
vision of our future because again, we
haven't stayed present enough with
everything that we need to learn in
order to figure out who we're going to
be next.
And this point has already been made a
couple of times in this video, but I
just want to reiterate it because it's
so important. In order to actually
construct a new future for ourselves in
which we don't need this person or this
set of circumstances anymore, we have to
be present with the pain of missing it.
We have to be present with the void of
those things in our lives.
We have to feel and be with ourselves in
every single moment where we
metaphorically open that bedroom door
expecting to see the hallway and see
nothing instead. We have to feel the
ache of those moments where we're
expecting them to call and our phone
goes silent. In those moments, can we
stay present with ourselves? Can we
notice what's happening in our body?
What's happening in the room around us?
And the more that we move through that
reality and engage with that reality and
learn the lessons that that reality
needs us to learn, the more we construct
a new version of ourselves that builds a
new future from where we are
authentically located now. And if we try
to skip that middle step where we have
to be present with the void, we can only
construct neurotic futures that do not
make any sense because we are not
integrating this thing that has happened
that is whether we want to admit it to
ourselves or not changing us and
changing the way that we look at the
world. So early in 2024 when I was on
the heels of this massive heartbreak, I
read this book called The Wisdom of a
Broken Heart by Susan Pyiver. And in the
book, she recognizes the importance of
not only focusing on what the
relationship gave you and how you
transformed through being in
relationship with whoever it is that
you're now mourning, but also
recognizing the importance of what the
heartbreak itself gave you. So how you
changed by moving through that period of
loss, what you learned in that process
and who you become on the other side of
it. And if we are resisting grief and we
are refusing to stay present with our
feelings around it, we cannot let it
change us. And if we cannot let it
change us, then it's impossible to build
a new future for ourselves because again
the future gets built through a series
of present moments. This is something
that Pemma Shoddran also talks about in
her book When Things Fall Apart, which
is one of my all-time favorite books on
this earth. She talks about how when we
are present with pain and with
loneliness and with existential dread
and all of those terrible feelings that
so many of us try to do anything to take
ourselves out of when we are grieving.
Those are the moments that most connect
us to everybody else on the planet
because every single other person alive
experiences those things. And this is
also a very helpful anecdote for me when
I feel myself being perfectionistic
about anything. remembering that it's
actually in those moments of absolute
agony where we feel the most alone, that
we are in fact most connected to
something that is at the core of the
human condition and that exists inside
of every single other person. And the
more we can be present with that and
allow ourselves to actually be changed
by it, the more we're able to connect
with others in the future because that
aloneeness and agony that we feel in the
grief process exists in everybody. One
of my favorite Cheryl Stra quotes of all
time and I have a lot of competition in
this department because she is one of my
favorite authors of all time is a quote
she has about grief that goes, "It is
impossible for you to go on as you were
before. So you must go on as you never
have. And to get to that place where we
are able to go on as we never have, we
have to accept that our old ways of
going on are over and for a little while
we're not going to have the answer to
what comes next. So when we can learn to
be present with uncertainty to get our
sea legs so to speak through the really
challenging and discombobulating moments
of our lives which are going to happen
to all of us. These are the moments
where we can build those new skills that
we so desperately want to have with the
most success. Grief is an absolutely
terrible experience. And it is one of
our most profound opportunities to start
showing up differently in a way that
builds us into a much stronger, more
compassionate, and more honest version
of ourselves if we are able to stay on
the page with it. All right, this has
been a very long video, so I'm going to
leave it at that for today. But as
always, any thoughts, any questions,
anything coming up for you guys as you
go through this video, please leave it
in the comment section. I love you guys.
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other, and I will see you back
here again really soon.
[Music]