Hey guys, I'm Heidi Prib. Welcome back
to my channel, or welcome if you're new
here. Over the past couple videos that
I've put out on this channel, we've been
looking at what happens when either
we're having an attachment activation
response. So, for those who air more
anxious, when your attachment system
gets really triggered, it can feel like
you are desperate at any cost to get
your attachment figure to pay attention
to you and help you soothe your pain and
return to
regulation. Or on the flip side, what
happens for those who air more avoidant
on the attachment spectrum and how an
attachment system trigger can cause you
to deactivate and feel as though you are
only going to be able to self-regulate
and feel okay and stressfree again when
you have taken space from your
attachment relationships and given
yourself the opportunity to connect more
fully to your own experience.
And today, what we're going to be
talking about is the fearful avoidant
attachment style and what it means to
have both activation triggers and
deactivation triggers. So, the first
thing I want to address is that one of
the most common questions I get about
attachment theory is when you have a
fearful avoidant attachment style, is it
basically just being anxious sometimes
and avoidant sometimes or is it kind of
its own beast? And my answer to that is
yes and yes. Yes as in you are going to
get triggered similarly to how an
anxious person gets triggered sometimes
if you air fearful avoidant and you are
also going to get triggered the way an
avoidant person gets triggered
sometimes. But there's also a third
thing that happens which is that because
your system is chronically shifting
between different response patterns
unconsciously there are kind of meta
feelings that you are going to start
having about your experience of the
oscillation itself. So what I mean by a
metap is a feeling that you are having
about another feeling. So generally
those on the anxious side of the
attachment spectrum tend to be quite
expressive about their feelings. And
while they might absolutely sometimes
regret things that they've said in the
heat of the moment, those who air
fearful avoidant when in a deactivated
state are likely to experience extreme
shame over the feelings that they had
and expressed well activated. And then
on the flip side of things, those who
heir more purely dismiss of avoidant in
the attachment spectrum tend to crave a
lot of freedom and independence from
their relationships. And while sometimes
they will absolutely feel remorse over
the ways in which that impacts their
partner's desire to be close to them,
those who air fearful avoidant tend to
experience a huge amount of guilt over
the independence that they crave in a
relationship. Because while they have
that avoidant patterning online much of
the time that tells them you will only
be able to express yourself and be
authentic and feel like yourself when
you are not engaged in a close
attachment relationship. They also have
that inshed patterning of the anxious
style online much of the time that tells
them in order to be close to someone you
have to give up your own wants and needs
and values and kind of contort yourself
into who this other person wants you to
be. And so there is a really big
challenge that comes not just from
experiencing each of these states, but
also from oscillating between them and
in your differing states, having strong
self- judgments about how you behaved or
acted in the other state. So what we're
going to look at today is some of the
ways in which the fearful avoidant
experiences both activation triggers and
deactivation triggers in a way that is
unique to the fearful style itself. So,
we'll start with the activation side of
things. Before we go too deep into that,
if you have not watched my video on
anxious activation responses, which is
linked in the description of this one,
you might just want to pause the video
now and go check it out because it will
absolutely likely come in handy to
employ some of those tools and
strategies if you're finding yourself in
an activated response. And so, that part
can't be ignored. But then what we're
going to look at here is essentially how
to take care of yourself after you've
experienced an anxious activation
response and some of the judgments that
might come up in you as a result of
looking back on your past behavior once
you've had a little bit of distance from
it. So, I mentioned early on, and we're
going to go into this now, that the
fearful avoidant often experiences a lot
of shame over the fact that they a have
feelings in the first place and b
especially when they express those
feelings, particularly if those feelings
were not received well by the other
person. So, like the dismissive
avoidant, fearful avoidant is an
avoidant style type. So what that means
is that those who air fearful generally
do have that same avoidant history of
having their bids for connection which
includes showing any form of vulnerable
emotion rejected by their caregivers.
And so there's a sense of shame that
tends to develop around our attachment
seeking behaviors when we air avoidant
in any capacity. And because the fearful
avoidant might spend a lot of their time
with those emotional responses that
exist in them inhibited or even fully
repressed, so they might not even notice
walking around their day-to-day lives
just how many emotions are happening for
them under the surface until they get
triggered. The fearful avoidant, like
the dismissive avoidant, can often have
a self-image that kind of prides
themselves on their ability to deal with
emotions well, which for those on the
avoidant side of the spectrum often
translates internally to being kind of
stoic and unaffected by the
circumstances of their lives. The
problem is that when you get activated
as a fearful avoidant and your system is
now screaming at you to do those
proximity seeking behaviors to get your
partner's attention to get your point
and your feelings across, you are going
to experience very strong instances of
emotion. And those emotions might be
even stronger for you than they are for
those who air anxious because they are
so frequently repressed otherwise.
So again, if you air anxiously attached
and not fearful avoidant, it's likely
that on a day-to-day basis, you are
relatively aware of the subtle emotions
that are arising in your system because
you are physiologically wired around
having that in your awareness. So, even
though it's highly likely that you are
doing a lot of conscious repressing of
your feelings because you want to stay
in connection with people and might have
a story that bringing in too many of
your own wants and needs is going to
threaten your connections. It's often
quite different for the fearful avoidant
in that they are not as consciously
aware of their own wants and needs on a
day-to-day basis, particularly their
wants and needs that pertain to other
people. So, like the avoidant, the
fearful avoidant is generally pretty
aware of what they want to do and
accomplish to keep themselves feeling
resourced and okay. But often they're a
little bit more tuned out to what their
attachment needs are. And then when
those attachment needs come online, they
might come paired with this feeling of
this absolutely has to be attended to
right now. And the reason that is
happening is because your system is
aware of the fact that you naturally
repress these things. And so when they
do break through into your awareness, it
feels very urgent to get them addressed
because some part of you knows that if
you don't address them now, they're
going to go back underground and not get
dealt with. So, even though a lot of the
traditional advice for working with
anxious attachment triggers will be
helpful for you as a fearful avoidant,
there's something additional you're
going to have to factor in, which is
that if you want to lower the intensity
to a manageable level of these
breakthroughs of emotion, the most
important thing you need to focus on is
getting yourself sensitized to those
emotions more regularly on a daily
basis. And this is likely going to be
completely counterintuitive to what you
think you need to do as a fearful
avoidant. Each attachment style tends to
have its own kind of ideal of what
healing looks like that is not quite
accurate. And for the fearful avoidant,
very often the idea is once I am healed,
then I will not be emotional anymore. So
the emotions that sometimes break
through and the needs that sometimes
break through are often seen as the
problem. And so it feels
counterintuitive to accept that the way
to work with these activation responses
might actually be to more consciously
integrate the things that come out when
we're activated into our day-to-day
awareness and our day-to-day life. So to
make our attachment needs more conscious
for ourselves, not
less. But this is absolutely the growth
path for the fearful avoidant,
especially when it comes to those
anxious activation triggers. They will
not feel as urgent to deal with all at
once if you can give your body proof
that you are going to attend to these
things in a different state. So rather
than exploding and then suppressing, you
can start looking at the feelings and
the needs that you have when you are in
that state of feeling desperate for your
partner's attention and co-regulation or
when you are feeling really mad at
someone and like you are finally going
to tell them exactly what you think.
What needs to happen in those instances
is you need to be able to listen to that
trigger and say, "I hear you. I believe
you have information that matters and
right now might not be the best time for
me to let it all out because I am
feeling really activated.
But I promise you, you being yourself,
that I will deal with this tomorrow or
the next day or whenever it is that I
feel like I have returned to a state
where I can deal with it in a more
reasonable way. And the kicker here is
that you actually have to do it or else
you will not believe yourself in those
moments. So, I remember this specific
trajectory for myself where I started
getting sensitized on a day-to-day level
to more of what I wanted out of other
people and my relationships and which
boundaries I needed to set in order to
feel okay in my relationships. And the
more I did this and the more I actually
sat down with the people in my life and
had those hard conversations, the more I
trusted myself when my body did have
those hyperactive trigger responses come
online that if I did not go scream at
that person who I'm really pissed at
right now, I would have a conversation
with them the next day and actually
express what my problems are in a way
that gives it the best chance at those
problems getting seen and addressed. So
again, the more we start paying
attention to and sensitizing ourselves
to our own needs, particularly our
attachment and relationship needs when
we are not triggered, the less urgent it
starts feeling when we are triggered to
get our point across. And one way to
start sensitizing yourself to what your
attachment needs are is to look at your
4F responses. So your fight, flight,
freeze, and fawn responses. When we find
ourselves in a state of either being
frozen and wanting to kind of withdraw
from relationships or when we feel
really angry at someone or when we're
feeling really distracted and not
present or when we're feeling super
peopleleasy and like we just want to
caretake someone, those are all
indications that there might be
something going on for us emotionally
that's related to the relationship
dynamic that our bodies are frantically
trying to hide from us. So that doesn't
mean that if you're having a fight,
flight, freeze, or fawn response, that
is the moment in which you want to go
digging for that gold. But looking back
on when you've had those responses and
what your needs might have been in those
moments can give you really good
information about what your relational
needs are that are generally obscured to
you by your own avoidant psychology. And
again, the more we can start surfacing
those needs and bringing them into our
relationship dynamics when we are
feeling regulated, the less intense our
disregulated episodes are going to start
feeling. And the other thing we want to
look at here when it comes to our
activation responses, if we do go
through an instance where we just
explode on someone and we are really not
happy after the fact with how we dealt
with that and we are having a shame
spiral about it, what we want to really
focus on is not throwing the baby out
with the bathwater. So, even if you do
not like the way that you addressed a
problem, maybe you were really mean to
your partner when you brought up a
certain issue you have, maybe you were
really unreasonable or even manipulative
about trying to get some need met. This
is going to feel so counterintuitive,
but it is actually really beneficial for
your own healing and the health of your
partnership for you to be able to
separate out the feeling and the need
that you had in that scenario from the
actions that you took in your attempt to
get it fulfilled. So, for example, if I
got really angry at someone and I called
them names, I probably absolutely want
to go back to that person when I'm
feeling calmer and apologize for how I
expressed myself and for the ways in
which I was unkind or out of integrity
with myself. But what you do not want to
throw out with the bathwater is the
feeling that you had that led to that
behavior. So, one of my absolute
all-time favorite quotes on anger in
particular comes from the book Why Does
He Do That? by Lundy Braftoft who is
someone who runs anger management
programs and he says that one of the
things he always tells the people coming
into his programs is you do not have an
anger problem, you have an abuse
problem. And this is really important to
separate out because anger is a natural
human emotion that we all have and that
we all need to find ways to express
without causing undue harm to ourselves
or others. Abuse is what happens when we
do not have healthy outlets for
expressing anger. So the point here is
that we need to be able to parse apart
the feeling that we had which is a
natural and normal reaction to being
alive. Things like anger or fear or
desperation happened to all of us from
the action that we gave ourselves
permission to take when we were
experiencing that feeling. And we can
take accountability for the actions that
we took while keeping in mind that we
still need to resolve the feeling that
was present in a healthier and more
direct way. Again, as a fearful
avoidant, you are probably prone to
thinking that the way to get rid of bad
behavior is to better control your
feelings and to make sure that you do
not feel those things anymore. But in
most cases, the problem is not that you
are feeling. It is in fact that you
haven't learned healthy ways of both
accepting and expressing your feelings
at a lower level. So by the time they've
broken through your awareness, you might
already feel out of control of them. But
again, one last time, the emotion is not
the problem. The emotion needs to be
dealt with, just not necessarily in the
way that you feel like dealing with it
when you are triggered. So that's one
side of the spectrum for fearful
avoidance. learning to integrate more
emotion into your daily life and be
aware of more of your attachment needs
so that they do not only come out when
you are triggered. And on the other side
of things, you also need to get better
acquainted with the parts of yourself
that very naturally and healthfully need
things like space and boundaries and to
stay in connection with yourself when
you're in close relationships. So again,
fearful avoidance tend to have a lot of
natural imshment patterning online that
might be telling them things like as
soon as you are in a relationship, you
are a bad person if you are doing
anything other than giving your partner
everything they need, caretaking your
partner. I find that more so than any
other attachment style, fearful
avoidance are so caretaky. And there
might be this patterning that comes
online that just tells you anytime you
want to step back and take time and
space for yourself or connect with
yourself or find ways in which you are
different from your partner that matter
to you and nurture those parts of
yourself. If you are doing any of that,
you are being a bad person. And so then
what happens? Because we all have a
natural need for space and distance and
to be our own person even inside of
close relationships. That part of you
that knows you need that space is going
to start telling you you have to get out
of this relationship so that you can
connect with yourself again. And what
that part needs to learn is that you can
absolutely stay connected to yourself
when inside of an intimate relationship.
It's just going to take some practice in
how to navigate that. So, when I look
back on the years that I spent dating as
a fearful avoidant, there were a lot of
relationships I had that were on again,
off again, on again, off again, with the
breakups almost always being initiated
by me when I felt smothered and like I
needed space to connect with myself and
then the getting back also usually
initiated by me when I missed the person
and wanted to be with them again. And
what is so painful to look at because
those dynamics caused so much pain and
disorientation for both me and my then
partners is that if I were to take any
one of those relationships, so let's say
one that was on again off again for like
3 years and if I were to look at the
amount of time over that 3-year period
as a whole that I spent with my partner
versus the amount of time that I spent
alone nurturing my relationship to
myself and I were to add it all out and
take the average so deeply ironically,
it would probably average out to
approximately the same amount of solo
versus partner time that someone in a
secure relationship would naturally
have. It's just that secure people are
attuned to when they need space on a
day-to-day basis and have no problem
carving out that space and taking it for
themselves with respect to their
partner's needs. And so instead of
getting totally enshed with their
partner and then needing to be totally
separate from them in order to
self-regulate, they are just able on a
day-to-day basis to have a mix of
partner time and alone time and to keep
their connection to themselves alive
inside of a partnership while also
taking lots of time to spend with their
partner in an uninshed way. And so this
is another kind of relationship ideal
that might need to die for you as a
fearful avoidant. This idea that once
you have gotten rid of all of your pesky
feelings, then you will be available for
full-time caretaking in your
relationship. When in reality, you need
both your own feelings and you need to
take space for yourself to nurture your
connection to self within any
relationship if you want it to be
healthy and sustainable. So, you really
have to go through a journey of learning
that it's okay to attune to what your
feelings and needs are and to both
negotiate those needs with your partner
when that's the appropriate route to
take, but also to spend time alone
nurturing your connection to yourself
when that's the appropriate route to
take. And as long as you are feeling
chronic shame over the fact that you
have feelings and needs, as well as
chronic guilt over the concept of
needing to be your own person, even
while in a relationship, you are
probably going to be stuck flip-flopping
between these extremes that cause so
much disorientation for you and the
people that you get close to. But of
course, this all comes from a deeply
unconscious place. And just like any of
the insecure styles, nobody with fearful
patterning is consciously trying to
behave this way. It's just a natural
response pattern that was once adaptive
in a certain set of circumstances that
as you grow up and start looking at
things from a more zoomed out,
enlightened perspective, you have the
opportunity to start changing. So the
moral of all of this is that if you air
fearful avoidant, yes, you are going to
have anxious triggers and you're going
to have deactivation triggers and you
are going to want to look at how to deal
with both of those. But you're also
going to want to look at the meta
feelings that come up for you in
response to both of those because until
you are able to accept and integrate the
fact that there is wisdom to both of
your triggers and in both states your
body is desperately trying to get you to
pay attention to something it needs.
It's only once you can start seeing the
wisdom in that that you can actually get
onto the path of healing towards a more
secure style where you are no longer
trying to deal with relationships
through chronic self-abandonment and
instead can be aware of and good at
advocating for your needs the same way
you tend to be pretty good at listening
to and accommodating for your partners.
All right, that's all I'm going to say
on the topic for today, but as always,
let me know if you have any thoughts,
questions, feelings popping up as you go
through this video. Please leave them in
the comment section below. I love you
guys. I hope you're taking care of
yourselves and each other, and I will
see you back here again really soon.
[Music]