The borderline self is traumatized and
it's easily overrun with feelings of
badness that evoke paranoid anxiety.
Such anxieties can be neutralized by
redrawing the lines of self and others
so that the bad feelings are perceived
to exist in someone else or rewriting
history so that the self is no longer
guilty of having done anything wrong.
Familiar borderline level narratives
include statements that blameshift or
minimize consequences of their actions
like I only did it because you wouldn't
listen to me or you made me feel so bad
so I got you back
etc. In addition, splitting can produce
a devalued selfate that evokes
reassuring or sympathetic responses.
You're right. I'm terrible and I don't
deserve to live. or I'm such a horrible
person that I don't deserve love and I'm
not surprised that you hate me. In both
cases, there's an inability to construct
a balanced, moderate, and realistic
version of events where neither the self
nor the other becomes a bad object. This
dynamic makes apologies feel hollow or
manipulative. If someone hurts you and
then apologizes by insisting they're
such a terrible person that they don't
deserve to live, it forces you to take
care of them, shifting attention away
from the harm that they caused. It's
important to underscore that these
dynamics are not usually intentionally
manipulative. They reflect the
borderline individual's unstable self-
structure, paranoid anxiety, and
tendency to blur boundaries in response
to strong emotions.
That being said, without stable images
of the self and others, without history,
there can be no real accountability.
Ogden's term for this mode of perceiving
and relating is self as object. It's
where both the self and others are
experienced as interchangeable objects
rather than stable, enduring subjects
with histories that can't be rewritten
to manage anxiety. He writes, "In a
realm of objects as opposed to subjects,
safety is attained through qualitative
shifts and magical all or nothing
transformations. The past is constantly
changing and each new event radically
changes all previous ones. The present
is immediately projected onto all
previous experience, thus annihilating
the past. The past becomes merely a
fluid extension of the present. Only
when another person can no longer be
magically recreated does it become
possible to miss someone who is away or
to mourn someone who has died or who has
left permanently. When the other can be
experienced as having an existence
separate from one's own, it becomes
possible to be with that person and be
away from that person in an entirely
different way from that which had been
possible previously.