Hi everyone. This week's insight is
drawn from a section of my upcoming
video on narcissism at the neurotic
level of personality organization. That
video will look at what happens when
someone with a narcissistic personality
style moves toward greater integration,
emotional complexity, and the capacity
for self-reflection. What follows here
is a preview from that video, an adapted
portion of that script that focuses on
selfwork and internal change, especially
when therapy isn't an option. Enjoy.
I'm often asked how a person can heal if
they don't have a therapist. Is it
possible to make meaningful progress on
your own? Well, I believe it is, but
there will always be aspects of your
psychology that you won't fully
recognize because you're looking at
yourself and the world through your own
filters. We often need someone else to
help us discover things that are
otherwise hiding in plain sight. We also
need help to put words to implicit
feelings and experiences that have not
yet been symbolized but nevertheless
form an emotional backdrop of our
internal lives. Something psychoanalyst
and author Christopher Bolus called the
unthought known because personality
issues are relationally created and
relationally embedded. I strongly
believe they must be relationally
healed. However, part of that healing
also involves transforming your
relationship with yourself. So, to that
end, here are some strategies that might
be helpful. Mindfulness and present
moment awareness. This practice involves
sitting with your thoughts, feelings,
and sensations as they arise and
choosing simply to let them be. Try not
to pull them close and try not to push
them away. Treat them like actors on a
stage, each with a role to play. They
appear, recite their lines, and then
exit to make space for a new actor with
new lines and a different role in the
story. You don't need to accept
everything they say as truth. Just watch
the play unfold. These are parts of you,
yes, but they aren't all of you. Try to
tolerate the presence of thoughts,
feelings, or memories that feel
uncomfortable. Let them be. Observe them
without reacting or rushing to get rid
of them. This doesn't mean resigning
yourself to suffering. It means
cultivating a stance of openness and
allowing rather than one of resistance
and
struggle. I statements and non-defensive
communication. Recognize that everyone
has their own version of reality. Your
perceptions are no more objectively true
than anyone else's. Take ownership of
them. When expressing yourself,
acknowledge that you are the author of
your own thoughts and unique
perspective. Use phrases like, "I feel,
I would like, or I'm struggling with
rather than assuming that your
experience reflects an ultimate
truth." You have your own perspectives
and others do as well. Relationships are
about negotiating between these
perspectives. There's almost always
compromise. You can get some of what you
want, but never all of it. That's the
bad news. The good news is that the
other person must also compromise. And
if mutual compromise isn't present, then
it's probably not a healthy
dynamic.
Self-acceptance. This is related to
mindfulness. You're an evolving dynamic
process, not a fixed
entity. Allow yourself to be imperfect.
Allow yourself to have parts that need
work, parts that others don't like, even
parts that you yourself don't like.
Don't try to get rid of those parts
because it never works. Don't try to
force yourself into feeling or
performing in a way that you think will
make other people happy. Don't punish
yourself for not fitting a preconceived
idea of who or what you're quote
supposed to be. There is no supposed
to. There's a beautiful old oak tree
outside my office window. It's full of
twists and turns. Some branches are
withered, others are massive and robust.
I think all of us are like that tree.
Its shape wasn't designed. It's simply
the result of growing toward available
sunlight, drawing nutrients where it
could. That's how all of us develop. Our
early environments shape us, and we grow
in response to those conditions.
The tree's shape tells the story of its
resiliency and the compromises it had to
make to grow and survive. And one can't
appreciate the tree's beauty without
accepting this history, this shape. Try
to do the same thing for yourself. Try
to see your own beauty. It doesn't mean
you can't change and grow, but it does
mean that you can't go back in time and
be a different tree planted in a
different place with a different shape.
The world is better with my favorite
tree, twisty and turny though it may be.
And the same is true for
you. Let history be real. One of the
ways we avoid pain is by trying to
obliterate, alter, or rewrite history.
But for the world to feel meaningful, it
must be bounded by
limitations. We love people because of
their imperfections, not in spite of
them. Their idiosyncrasies, struggles,
and limitations are part of their
history, just like the shape of my
favorite oak tree tells the story of its
history and thereby adds to its beauty.
You have a history and so do I. And
neither of us can change it. We can
however shape the narrative of that
history so that it emphasizes
resiliency, growth, and connection.
While we have some editorial freedom in
how we understand our past, we can't
reinvent ourselves entirely. We must
work within the limitations of reality
and of history. Doing so allows us to
build a life of
meaning. Work to recognize and mitigate
splitting.
Splitting is difficult to recognize
because it distorts perception, but over
time you can learn to detect its
characteristic cognitive and emotional
shifts. Common indicators might include
things like black and white or all or
nothing thinking. If you perceive
someone, yourself included, as entirely
good or entirely bad, then you're likely
splitting. Rapid shifts in perception.
If someone you usually care about
suddenly seems irredeemably awful, or if
you go from admiration to disdain, then
splitting is probably at play. Emotional
whiplash. If you find yourself hating
someone that you normally love or
suddenly viewing them as embarrassing,
worthless, or persecuto, it's worth
questioning whether your perception has
temporarily shifted.
Recognizing splitting as it happens can
be enormously helpful in mitigating its
effects. If you notice yourself
splitting, you can say something like,
"I think I'm splitting right now. I need
some time to reintegrate." Simply
acknowledging this places you in a
psychological space where such
integration becomes
possible. When we're emotionally flooded
or in a more defended place
psychologically, admitting to splitting
can feel intolerable, almost as if doing
so would invalidate your entire
experience. But notice the all or
nothing distortion in that fear. You
don't have to be 100% right for your
feelings to still matter. You are the
author of your perspectives, and some of
them may be inaccurate, and that's okay.
Individuals functioning at the neurotic
level more frequently recognize and
accept that they aren't always correct.
They accept that they may misperceive
intentions, emphasize one part of an
interaction while ignoring another, or
overreact. And importantly, they don't
experience being wrong as annihilating.
Mistakes don't necessarily shatter their
self-cohesion. Being wrong about
something, even something important, is
part of being
human. Try to notice extreme perceptions
about
yourself. Extreme self-perceptions,
whether overly positive or excessively
negative, are often signs of splitting
and associated borderline defenses.
Thoughts like, "I'm the best, I'm
perfect, or I'm smarter, more
attractive, or more talented than other
people," can be hallmarks of
grandiosity, even when they contain an
element of truth. It's not uncommon for
individuals struggling with pathological
narcissism to possess legitimate talents
and attractive qualities. The key is
noticing how these thoughts are being
used. Are they surfacing as a way to
counteract more subtle feelings of
insecurity, need, anxiety, or doubt?
Individuals functioning in the neurotic
range may still reflect on their
strengths and accomplishments, but
usually not in a way that completely
negates the worth of other people. Their
positive self- assessments tend to exist
alongside an awareness of their
limitations rather than serving as a
defense against them.
The same goes for negative
self-perceptions. Thoughts like, "I'm
the worst. I'm hideous. Everyone hates
me. I don't deserve to exist." Or, "I'm
irreparably broken." reflect negative
splits in self-image. No one is entirely
good or entirely bad. No one excels at
everything and no one is without flaws.
Individuals in the neurotic range of
functioning maintain a more balanced
self view, acknowledging both strengths
and weaknesses without falling into
polarized
extremes. You're probably not the best,
but you're probably also not the worst.
You're likely somewhere in the middle.
If the idea of being ordinary in this
way feels threatening to your
self-concept, if it provokes feelings of
emptiness, insignificance, or fears of
annihilation, then you're likely caught
in a rigid and defensive state of mind
that tries to ward off vulnerability by
clinging to
extremes. Try to allow yourself simply
to be without defining yourself in
absolutes. Sit with whatever discomfort
arises. Use the mindfulness and
acceptance strategies discussed earlier.
Remind yourself that thoughts and
feelings, no matter how intense, do not
have the power to annihilate you, even
though they may feel as if they do.
Okay, so that's it for this week. If any
of this resonated with you, stay tuned
for the full video on narcissism at the
neurotic level. It'll go much deeper
into the personality organization
framework, the kinds of defenses most
often used at this level, and what
genuine psychological growth often looks
like from the inside out. Until next
time, take good care.
[Music]