Hi everyone, welcome to weekly
insights. Grandio phases of pathological
narcissism and NPD often include
feelings of euphoria, power, and
limitless potential. In these states of
mind, individuals experience themselves
as perfectly aligned with their ideal
self. They feel beautiful, intelligent,
witty, envied, and admired. Such
feelings can be extremely compelling.
I've often heard grandiose individuals
say, "This is the real me. This is how I
want to feel all the time." But here's
the problem. The grandiose experience of
self is just as much of a distortion as
the devalued experience of self. Neither
state is realistic or stable. And those
are two necessary ingredients for
healthy self-image and self-esteem.
When someone with NPD experiences the
expansive attitudes and self-image
inflation that characterize grandiosity,
they're entering unstable territory. The
instability is characterized by two
factors. First, the grandiose self-image
itself is unstable. It's based on
feelings and external
comparisons. Feelings are inherently
transient. Neither the good ones nor the
bad ones stick around. Narcissistic
grandiosity is the product of a feedback
loop between distortions in perception
and the positive feelings that come from
those distortions which then push
further distortions. The result is an
increasingly superlative self-image that
becomes increasingly untethered from
reality. It's sort of like the
high-pitched feedback you get when you
place a microphone too close to its own
speaker. The mic picks up the sound from
the speaker, amplifies it, and then
sends it back through the speaker where
the mic picks it up again, but even
louder this time. The output keeps
feeding back into the input, which
escalates the volume. Here's an example.
I once heard a colleague describe
themselves as the best therapist in the
state when venting frustration about a
professional setback that had come up. I
immediately wondered where they derived
this self-image because not only were
they a relatively new clinician, but
they were also comparing themselves to
thousands of other clinicians whose work
they'd never witnessed. This
self-description was based, it seems, on
how they wanted to view themselves, no
doubt producing a positive feeling that
in turn encouraged them to continue
viewing themselves in a superlative
light. The problem wasn't whether or not
they were correct because who knows, you
know, maybe they were the best therapist
in the state. The issue was more how
they were distorting their own
self-image to cope with disappointment
and
frustration. By viewing themselves as
the best, they were shortcircuiting
whatever meaning they could have made
out of the actual situation. instead of
an opportunity to learn and improve. It
became a travesty in which they were
robbed of something to which they were
entitled for being the
best. The second source of instability
and grandio self-image is the pressure
that the individual begins to feel in
order to maintain it. The colleague I
described was clearly insecure about
their status. Otherwise, why would they
need to counter their feelings of
disappointment and frustration with a
declaration of their unassalable
excellence? The declaration of being
quote the best is not one that the
individual entirely believed. They would
need other people to validate that
self-perception, or else they'd run the
risk of it collapsing into the
tremendous gulf of insecurity and
fragile self-esteem that I'm pretty sure
lay
underneath. In this way, internal
pressure becomes interpersonal pressure.
The individual begins to elicit praise
and admiration from others in either
direct or indirect ways. The
conversation becomes about this need to
shore up the grandio self-image in order
to keep it from collapsing. The pressure
to do this can become so great that the
individual will actually lash out
angrily at anyone who fails or refuses
to give them the admiration and
validation that they're seeking. They
may become devaluing, critical, overtly
entitled, or even cruel. An individual
with more stable and realistic
self-esteem might recognize that they
were engaged in cruel or hurtful
treatment of other people. But
individuals who are trying to defend and
prop up a grandiose self-image can't
make such recognitions. To do so would
be to undermine the very grandiose
self-image that they're trying to
protect. And thus another positive
feedback loop is constructed. The
premise is that the self is the best.
Any evidence that runs counter to that
narrative is reinterpreted to support it
instead. The individual wasn't being
critical and devaluing. the other person
was being unsupportive. The fault lies
outside the self because if it were
inside the self, it would threaten the
unstable, grandiose
self-image. Our minds search for
evidence to confirm our biases, what we
want or need to believe about ourselves
and about the world around us. This is
one of the factors that can limit
insight in NPD and make treatment for
these conditions difficult. The
individual recognizes implicitly that
the stakes feel incredibly high. The
benefits of increased insight or having
more satisfying relationships can pale
in comparison to the existential dread
of collapse into a vulnerable, empty or
devalued self-state. This feeling of
emergency and need can raise the
psychological stake so high that empathy
becomes impaired. It's hard to think or
care about how another person feels when
you're struggling for psychological or
emotional
survival. The cruel irony of this
struggle is that it's seldom recognized
or understood by other people. What they
see is the entitlement, the grandiosity,
the insensitivity, and the devaluing
critical or exploitative treatment of
other people. And to be clear, none of
that is okay. But what others don't see
is the wounded self that produces those
behaviors. They don't see that the
individual is desperately afraid of
collapse into extremely dysphoric self-
states. They don't understand that NPD
is a trauma- based disorder that
involves dawning a suit of armor to
defend against complete fragmentation of
the self. Nor how the suit of armor
itself becomes a prison from which the
person can't escape without risking
further trauma to the already vulnerable
and wounded self. Ernest Wolf, a
frequent collaborator with Hines Kohut,
puts it like this. It is as if the child
were clothed in a suit of protective
armor whose heaviness forced him to grow
into grotesque shapes and drained him of
energy. Worse yet, after wearing the
armor for some years, the growing body
becomes so structurally distorted that
the armor can no longer be taken off,
even though the dangers against which it
protected have passed. End quote. While
Wol's quote captures the tragic nature
of narcissistic grandiosity, it's
important to recognize that this doesn't
have to become a life sentence.
Personally, I think Wolf overates the
extent to which the armor becomes fused
with the person underneath. And I also
think he underestimates human
resiliency. Yes, it can be difficult,
incredibly painful, and even terrifying
to take off the armor. Yes, it can feel
like the self will collapse into utter
worthlessness, non-being, or even worse.
But these feelings are themselves
distortions. They're based on very early
experiences, on parts of the self that
haven't matured and are easily
overwhelmed. And to those little kiddo
parts, it might seem like the self can't
support its own weight, that it needs
the grandiose fantasies in order to
function in the world. But kids can
grow. I don't care if you're 15, 35, or
75 years old. If you identify with what
I'm saying here, you can grow. It won't
happen overnight, and it won't be easy,
but I promise it'll be worth it. Okay,
so that's it for this week. Sorry I got
this one up a little late, but if you
like this video and you want to receive
videos like it on a weekly basis,
consider becoming a paid member of the
channel.
And until next time, take good care.
[Music]