Hi everyone, my name's Dr. Mark
Eatensson. Welcome to Heal NPD. This is
part two of a three-part video on the
narcissistic personality style organized
at the neurotic level. In part one, we
examined the developmental shift from
borderline to neurotic level
organization. Focusing on how a more
stable sense of self and object
constancy begin to emerge, we explored
how this newfound stability introduces
the capacity for mature object
relations, allowing individuals to see
themselves and others as enduring
subjects with separate minds, consistent
histories, and emotional depth. If you
haven't seen that video or the first two
parts of this series on psychotic and
borderline organizations, I recommend
watching those first. Links are in the
description. In this second video, we'll
turn our attention to the emotional
consequences of the shift to neurotic
organization. When the self solidifies
and history can no longer be rewritten
to manage anxiety, certain realities
become
unavoidable. The emergence of continuity
brings with it the capacity for
mourning, remorse, and
accountability. We'll explore what it
means to live as a subject with history.
how guilt and depressive anxiety replace
the paranoid anxieties of more primitive
states and how these changes reshape the
inner life of a narcissistic personality
style. So, let's get started.
[Music]
As I stated in the previous video, the
movement from immature to mature object
relations is a story of
self-defin. To achieve subjecthood, we
must develop the ability to cope with
frustration, envy, and disappointment
without fundamentally altering our
self-image or distorting how others are
represented in our minds. We must be
able to balance the contradictions in
how we feel about ourselves and other
people without resorting to boundary
blurring or identity fracturing defenses
like projection and splitting. And
finally, we must come to terms with the
reality that we're fundamentally
inalterably separate and distinct from
those around us. The foundational
groundwork for these capacities is
largely established in the first four
years of life. However, their
consolidation and refinement continue
throughout childhood. Early childhood is
spent in chronic states of psychological
collapse and reconstitution. Spilled
your milk, absolute breakdown. Mom left
for work, temporary loss of identity.
Got punished for coloring on the wall,
collapse of self-image into intolerable
badness accompanied by uncontrollable
screaming, and an inability to perceive
the caregiver as a good object. What was
formerly a good self in a diatic blend
with a good object has now become a bad
self in a diatic blend with a
hate-filled and rejecting bad object.
That is until your caregiver gives you a
hug, wipes away your tears, and
reassures you that you're still good and
loved. Now everything is magically okay
again. It's through this cycle of
breakdown and reconstitution that more
mature capacities emerge. But when
breakdowns are not followed by
reconstitution, when there is a
significant disparity between what the
child needs and what the early care
environment provides, mature ego
capacities may fail to develop. The
immature self remains illdefined, stuck
with contradictory, terrifying,
overwhelming or disorganizing fragments
of experience that can't be integrated.
In the absence of adequate structuring
and repair, the child is forced to rely
on psychotic or borderline level
defenses which either distort reality or
distort identity to prevent total
annihilation of the self. It's important
to stress that every child and every
family is different. What causes severe
developmental arrest in one child may
produce no discernable issues at all in
another. Different children have
different needs, different thresholds
and resiliencies. Even siblings raised
in the same family can have dramatically
different childhoods depending on what
was happening at crucial points in their
early development. It's also important
to stress that even though these levels
of organization are being presented here
as discrete and hierarchical, in
reality, we move in and out of different
modes of experiencing associated with
each level throughout our lives. For
example, severe trauma can temporarily
send someone who is otherwise healthy
into a mode of experiencing that is
essentially borderline or even
psychotic. If you're attacked in an
alleyway, you will immediately regress
to a borderline mode of thinking and
perceiving. The attacker is bad and
you're in existential danger. Your
thoughts will be dominated by paranoid
anxiety, the fear of annihilation. In
that moment, there's no room for nuance
or empathy. You're not concerned with
the attacker's backstory, socioeconomic
conditions, or systemic factors.
Survival is the only concern. The fact
that your perception of imminent danger
is accurate in this particular situation
is beside the point. The state of mind
itself is essentially the same as what
borderline or psychotic individuals
experience, only far more frequently and
in a greater variety of situations. For
psychotic or borderline individuals,
this hypervigilant all or nothing mode
of perception can be triggered not just
by a violent assault, but by something
as minor as a perceived slight at the
deli. Regardless of the objective
threat, the physiological and
psychological response is essentially
the same. Ultimately, the defining
difference between immature and mature
personality organizations is the
capacity to face a wider variety of
situations without resorting to
perceptual distortions in order to
manage paranoid anxiety.
Broadly speaking, the psychoanalytic
term for the mode of organizing
experience that underlies both psychotic
and borderline organizations is the
paranoid schizoid position. The paranoid
aspect refers to the individual's basic
stance toward the world as populated by
dangerous, hateful, attacking objects
from which good experience must be
defended. The skitsoid aspect refers to
the central tendency of splitting that
defines this mode of
experiencing. The good must be kept
separate from the bad, creating rigid
categories of all good and all bad
experience that feel too dangerous to
mix. If badness contaminates goodness,
it activates paranoid anxiety, the fear
of total annihilation of all internal
goodness. This in turn reaffirms the
necessity of continued splitting and
fragmentation. For example, in therapy,
many individuals with NPD express an
intense aversion to feelings of need or
dependency. They may actively detest
these feelings and look down on those
they perceive as quote needy or
dependent. In the early stages of
therapy, this aversion can make it
difficult to engage with any material
that uncovers the individual's
vulnerable, shamefilled longings for
care and nurturing. If the therapist
inadvertently touches on these longings,
the individual may react with
aggression, contempt, or even outright
derision. And it's not because they
rationally reject the need for care.
Rather, it's because they're too flooded
with paranoid anxiety at the prospect
that their defended grandiose
self-experience could be infiltrated by
the intolerable badness of their own
dependency needs. In this state,
dependency is not just uncomfortable.
It's perceived as a threat to
self-coherence and it demands defensive
repudiation.
In contrast to the paranoid schizoid
position that underlies most psychotic
and borderline functioning, the term for
the mode of experiencing that most often
underlies neurotic functioning is the
depressive position. So-called because
loss and grief become much more
difficult to deny. In this position, the
individual can no longer project badness
outward or split the self and other
people into good and bad parts. As a
result, the individual must confront
painful grief, loss, and disappointment,
experiences that were previously denied,
displaced, or
externalized. In the next part of this
video, we'll discuss the depressive
position in greater detail and also how
both the paranoid schizoid and
depressive positions coexist in all of
us. Rather than representing static
phases of development, they function as
an evershifting dialectic. two
fundamental organizing principles that
shape how we relate to ourselves and to
other people. As we discussed last time,
the primary developmental achievement of
neurotic organization is the capacity to
maintain a stable historically grounded
image of the self and others as subjects
rather than objects. With this
achievement comes the possibility of a
different kind of loss and therefore a
different kind of grief. If we hurt
someone we care about, the damage is
done and can't be undone. If someone
leaves us, they can't be replaced. Their
unique qualities are forever lost to us.
This loss can no longer be effectively
denied or minimized or undone through
borderline level defenses. With the
capacity to recognize the indelible harm
we can do to others also comes
recognition of the ways they can harm
us. And that casts our vulnerability and
dependency on those we care about into
stark relief. Unlike earlier
developmental stages where the lost
object can be magically replaced, denied
or split into good and bad parts, the
depressive position involves the
realization that people we love are
whole, irreplaceable and capable of
being hurt by us, just as we ourselves
are whole, irreplaceable, and capable of
being hurt by those we love. With this
recognition comes guilt, concern, and
the need for reparation. All of which
are hallmarks of depressive position
thinking. Whereas someone in the
borderline range may attempt to
magically reconstitute the self through
grandiosity, mania, or a wild night out,
an individual in the neurotic range will
find such things ineffective.
The self can't be magically
reconstituted because doing so would
mean erasing history and therefore the
very meaning of the events that led to
the self being hurt in the first place.
The historical self is grounded in
meaning. And this is why principles and
values at the neurotic level tend to be
more enduring and less dictated by
immediate circumstances. They derive
less from situational factors and more
from a stable
identity. Similarly, while someone at
the borderline level might attempt to
make up for hurting someone else, they
may also become angry or devaluing if
those efforts fail to erase the injury.
Borderline level individuals frequently
feel frustrated or confused by neurotic
level individuals inability to be easily
swayed from their feelings or their
insistence on continually revisiting
things that the borderline level
individual did that hurt them. This is
because someone at the neurotic level
seeks reparation rather than
substitution of self states. Reparation
requires that the wrong be acknowledged
accompanied by a sincere apology and a
realistic plan not to have it happen
again. This is the only way to
reestablish trust and connection. These
two fundamental modes or position, the
paranoid schizoid and the depressive may
seem too different to coexist in the
same individual. In one, the self is an
object without temporal continuity. In
the other, both the self and other
people are stable subjects with enduring
histories that can't be undone or
denied. Nevertheless, both paranoid and
depressive positions are in constant
flux in all of us, particularly in very
early childhood with experience more
stably centering on the depressive
position as the child grows and
develops. For this to happen, there must
be enough good experience to make the
child feel increasingly confident that
the good parts can withstand exposure to
the bad. The paranoid schizoid position
is thus actually a hopeful one, a mode
of experiencing that seeks to protect
the possibility of goodness both in the
child and the outside world. By
separating experience into good and bad
parts, the child can ensure that some
good always survives even in the face of
overwhelming pain.
The coexistence of the paranoid schizoid
in depressive positions is a crucial
point with significant implications for
treatment and
healing. Progressing from a primarily
borderline mode of experiencing to a
primarily neurotic mode of experiencing
doesn't require the creation of entirely
new capacities that were never there
before. Rather, it requires bolstering
ego functions and the gradual
accumulation of good enough experience
within the individual, shifting the
balance from a primarily paranoid
schizoid mode to a primarily depressive
one. It's also essential to remember
that individuals at the borderline level
are not incapable of neurotic
functioning. Their self-structure is
fragile and reactive, making them prone
to regression into a paranoid skitsoid
position under perceived threat and
paranoid anxiety. The self must be
strengthened, and that work happens most
effectively within a therapy
relationship. Recall the earlier example
of the toddler who colored on the wall
and was punished leading to a sudden
collapse from a good self in a diatic
blend with a good object into a bad self
in a diatic blend with a punishing
object. The key here is that at this
stage the child's sense of self is not
yet fully individuated. It remains
merged with important objects like
caregivers. Thus, distortions in the
child's self-perception inevitably lead
to distortions in their perception of
the object and vice versa. As theorist
and analyst Melanie Klene famously
stated, "I believe that the ego is
incapable of splitting the object,
internal and external, without a
corresponding split taking place in the
ego." End quote. This incomplete
separation between self and other in
borderline states is actually what makes
treatment possible. Just as a young
child relies on the goodness of
caregivers to define their own sense of
goodness and ward off paranoid anxiety,
a borderline level patient in treatment
relies on the therapist's goodness in
much the same way. When I teach these
concepts to doctoral students, I
emphasize that in the treatment of
borderline level patients, the therapist
and patient are never simply talking
about things. Instead, they're always
engaged in some kind of unconscious
enactment. Even when it seems as though
the patient is simply discussing an
innocuous life event, the therapist must
remain attuned to what is being
projected, split off, or acted out. Just
as young children experience themselves
in a diatic merger with their
caregivers, the borderline patient self
remains blended with the therapist in a
fluid relational
swirl. The patients feelings of badness
are not contained in the patient.
They're also perceived to exist in the
therapist. For example, the patient may
rationalize that they feel bad one week
because the therapist is ineffective or
dismissing or rejecting, even if the
previous week they felt totally
differently about the therapist because
the patient felt good that week. A
borderline patient is always searching
for a way to resolve the ambivalence
between two opposite poles of
experience. On the one hand, there's
merger which feels safe but also
presents the threat of identity loss and
on the other separation which allows the
self to actualize but being a separate
self also presents the threat of
annihilating shame. Therapists who fail
to recognize these dynamics risk being
pulled into destructive recapitulations
of early trauma. The borderline patient
can't tolerate being a fully separate
self and will repeatedly pull the
therapist into psychic merger wherein
the therapist begins to experience the
patient's own feelings of badness or
idealization in ways that can feel
disorienting and boundary dissolving.
The therapist's task is to stay mostly
centered, resisting both the pull to
merge and the defensive rejection of
dependency. To do this, the therapist
must hold the patients need for them
alongside the patients unfathomable fear
that individuation will bring
annihilation. provide consistent good
enough interpretations that make room
for complexity rather than reinforcing
splitting and offer warmth, a mostly
stable boundary and positive encouraging
feedback that facilitates the gradual
internalization of more realistic
self-im images. This is long difficult
work for both parties. The process
constantly shifts from paranoid skitsoid
to depressive and then back to paranoid
skitsoid modes of organizing experience.
However, over time, the balance moves
toward longer periods of depressive
functioning and quicker returns to the
depressive position when ruptures occur.
When I work with borderline level
patients, I expect that the process will
feel personal, emotionally dangerous,
and at times intolerable. I also expect
to be personally implicated. I expect
accusations that I'm ineffective,
inattentive, arrogant, rejecting,
critical, or just plain dumb. Unlike
psychotic level patients, borderline
level patients must level criticisms
that feel real in order to effectively
evacuate the badness that they can't
tolerate. and I must be able to
metabolize these projected pieces of the
self and give them back in a way that
feels tolerable. This is the core of
relational psychotherapy. The
recognition that our psychologies are
fundamentally inalterably relational.
The wounds that create personality
disorders and severe mental illness are
often sustained in relationships. And
the only way to process these wounds and
move toward healthier functioning is
within the context of a healing
relationship. Feeling understood is good
medicine. Being decoded or found to use
Winnott's terminology is intrinsically
healing. Being held in unconditional
positive regard is the primary mechanism
through which we develop the ability to
maintain a stable and realistic
self-image. In normative development,
the movement from primarily borderline
to primarily neurotic level functioning
is made possible by a gradual
strengthening of ego functions, most
often within the context of early care
relationships that can survive rupture
without becoming dangerous to the child.
The child or later the adult in
treatment must experience others as
stable enough to withstand idealization,
devaluation, disappointment, and rage.
When a caregiver or therapist is able to
hold steady in the face of this
oscillation, offering containment
without retaliation or collapse, the
person slowly internalizes the idea that
not all conflict leads to catastrophe
and not all closeness leads to
engulfment or shame. These emotionally
reparative experiences begin to erode
the necessity of splitting. And over
time, the individual becomes able to
more consistently hold good and bad
qualities in mind at the same time. This
fosters the development of reflective
functioning, the ability to think about
one's own mental states and the mental
states of other people. It also makes
possible the internalization of more
stable realistic images of the self and
others. images that can persist even in
the face of overwhelming frustration or
distress. Crucially, this developmental
process depends on the accumulation of
what Donald Winnott called good enough
experience. Consistent opportunities for
the self to be recognized, held in mind,
and reconstituted after emotional
disruption. In treatment, this means
helping the patient notice when they're
splitting or distorting and gently
interpreting the function of those
defenses and offering an alternative
mode of connection that doesn't demand
omnipotence or dissociation to preserve
self-coherence. Neurotic level
functioning emerges through the slow
internalization of a world in which
painful emotional truths can be
survived, named, and shared.
We've spent considerable time on the
transition from borderline level to
neurotic level functioning because it's
a difficult threshold to grasp. There
are many misconceptions about this
process, particularly when it comes to
NPD. I can't count the number of times
that I've seen or heard the claim that
it's essentially impossible for someone
with NPD to heal, that is to move from
borderline to neurotic level. But once
you understand what a personality
disorder actually is, the path to
healing becomes remarkably clear. At its
core, treatment is the performance of
essential caregiving functions by the
therapist while simultaneously
acknowledging that the therapist can
never truly provide what the patient did
not receive in early development. This
paradoxical coexistence of two seemingly
contradictory truths that the therapist
both provides and does not provide what
was missing is precisely the dynamic
that underpins the depressive position.
The capacity to hold contradictory
emotional truths is the very hallmark of
mature psychological functioning. Author
Steven Johnson refers to this kind of
transformation as the hard work miracle.
I'm inclined to agree. Donald Winnott
wrote about the profoundly rewarding
experience of a caregiver who's finally
able to tell their grown child just how
difficult it was to raise them. The
sleepless nights, the sacrifices, the
frustration, and the worry. These are
experiences that a child cannot fully
comprehend until they've developed the
capacity to tolerate their own badness.
A caregiver being able to share the
trauma of parenthood with their grown
child represents a moment of mutual
recognition and shared insight. I've had
similar moments with patients who have
progressed to a more mature level of
organization where we're able together
to sit and look back on the path that
we've traveled and reflect on just how
difficult it actually was, how much we
struggled together, and how grateful we
are to have moved beyond those early
days of intense emotional hardship.
Such knowledge can only be meaningfully
shared by two individuals in the
depressive position where history is
real, loss has meaning, and the
mutuality of love and hate, independence
and dependency, goodness and badness can
be held, reflected upon, and understood
together. I'm also often asked what a
person can do if they don't have a
therapist. Is it possible to make
meaningful progress on your own? Well, I
believe that it is, but there will
always be aspects of your psychology
that you won't fully recognize because
you're looking at yourself and the world
through your own filters. We often need
another person to help illuminate what
hides in plain sight. We also need help
to begin to put words to implicit
feelings and experiences that have
hitherto not been symbolized but
nevertheless form the emotional backdrop
of our internal lives. Something that
psychoanalyst and author Christopher
Bolas called the unthought known.
Because personality issues are
relationally created and relationally
embedded. I strongly believe that they
must be relationally healed. However,
part of that healing involves
transforming your relationship with
yourself. To that end, here are some
strategies that may help you function
more consistently in the depressive
position. Mindfulness and present moment
awareness. This practice involves
sitting with your thoughts, feelings,
and sensations as they arise and
choosing simply to let them be. Don't
pull them close and don't push them
away. Treat them more like actors on a
stage. each with a role to play. They
appear, they recite their lines, and
then they exit to make space for a new
actor with new lines and a different
role in the story. You don't need to
accept everything they say as truth.
Just watch the play unfold. These are
parts of you, yes, but they aren't all
of you. Try to tolerate the presence of
thoughts, feelings, or memories that
feel uncomfortable. Let them be. observe
them without reacting or rushing to get
rid of them. This doesn't mean resigning
yourself to suffering, but means
cultivating a stance of openness and
allowing rather than resistance and
struggle. Eye statements and
non-defensive communication. Recognize
that everyone constructs their own
version of reality. Your perceptions are
no more objectively true than someone
else's. Take ownership of them when
expressing yourself. Acknowledge that
you are the author of your thoughts. Use
phrases like I feel, I would like, or
I'm struggling with rather than assuming
that your experience reflects an
ultimate objective truth. That doesn't
mean that you're wrong or delusional,
just that you have your own perspective.
Just like everyone else, relationships
are about negotiating between
perspectives. There's almost always
compromise. You can get some of what you
want, but usually not all of it. That's
the bad news. The good news is that the
other person also has to compromise. If
mutual compromise isn't present in a
relationship, then it's probably not a
healthy dynamic.
Self-acceptance. This is related to
mindfulness. You are an evolving dynamic
process, not a fixed entity. Allow
yourself to be imperfect. Allow yourself
to have parts that need work, parts that
other people don't like, even parts that
you yourself don't like. Don't try to
get rid of those parts because it never
works. Don't try to force yourself into
feeling or performing in a way that you
think will make other people happy.
Don't punish yourself for not fitting a
preconceived idea of who or what you are
quote supposed to be. There is no
supposed to. There's a beautiful old oak
tree outside my office window. It's full
of twists and turns. Some branches are
withered, others are massive and robust.
I think all of us are like that tree.
Its shape wasn't designed. It's simply
the result of growing toward available
sunlight, drawing nutrients where it
could. That's how all of us develop. Our
early environments shape us, and we grow
in response to those conditions. The
tree's shape tells the story of its
resiliency and the compromises it had to
make in order to grow and survive. One
cannot appreciate the tree's beauty
without also accepting its history. In
other words, its shape. Try to do the
same thing for yourself. Try to see your
own beauty. It doesn't mean that you
can't change or grow, but it does mean
that you can't go back in time and be a
different tree planted in a different
place. The world is better with my
favorite tree, even with all of its
twists and turns. The same is true of
you. Let history be real. The paranoid
skitsoid position often involves
obliterating, altering, or rewriting
history in an effort to avoid pain. For
the world to feel meaningful, it must
also be bounded by
limitations. We love people because of
their imperfections, not in spite of
them. Their idiosyncrasies, struggles,
and limitations are part of their
history. You have a history, and so do
I. And neither of us can change it. We
can, however, shape the narrative of
that history so that it emphasizes
resiliency, growth, and connection.
While we have some editorial freedom in
how we understand our past, we can't
reinvent ourselves entirely. We must
work within the limitations of reality
and of history. And doing so allows us
to build a life of meaning. Work to
recognize and mitigate splitting.
Splitting is difficult to recognize
because it distorts perception, but over
time you can learn to detect its
characteristic cognitive and emotional
shifts. Common indicators sometimes
include black and white or all or
nothing thinking. If you perceive
someone, yourself included, as entirely
good or entirely bad, then you're likely
splitting. Rapid shifts in perception.
If someone you usually care about
suddenly seems irredeemably awful, or if
you go from admiration to disdain, then
splitting is probably at play. Emotional
whiplash. If you find yourself hating
someone that you normally love or
suddenly viewing them as embarrassing,
worthless, or persecuto, it's worth
questioning whether your perception has
temporarily shifted. Recognizing
splitting as it happens can be
enormously helpful in mitigating its
harmful effects. If you notice yourself
splitting, you can say something like,
"I think I'm splitting right now, and I
need some time to reintegrate."
Simply acknowledging this places you
closer to the depressive position where
integration is possible. In the paranoid
schizoid position, admitting to
splitting can feel intolerable, almost
as if doing so would somehow invalidate
your entire experience. But notice the
all or nothing distortion in that fear.
You don't have to be 100% right for your
feelings to matter. You are the author
of your perspectives and some of them
may be inaccurate. That's okay.
Individuals functioning at the neurotic
level more frequently recognize and
accept that they aren't always correct.
They accept that they may misperceive
other people's intentions, emphasize one
part of an interaction while ignoring
another or overreact to a situation. And
importantly, individuals at the neurotic
level don't experience being wrong as
annihilating. Mistakes don't shatter
their self-cohesion. Being wrong about
something, even something important, is
not in itself catastrophic. It's simply
a part of being human. Try to notice
extreme perceptions about yourself.
Extreme perceptions, whether overly
positive or overly negative, are often
signs of splitting and associated
borderline defenses. Thoughts like, "I'm
the best, I'm perfect, or I'm smarter,
more attractive, and more talented than
other people," can be hallmarks of
grandiosity, even if they contain
elements of truth. It's not uncommon for
individuals who struggle with
pathological narcissism to possess
legitimate talents or attractive
qualities. The key is noticing how these
thoughts are being used. Are they
surfacing as a way to counteract more
subtle feelings of insecurity, need,
anxiety, or doubt? Individuals
functioning in the neurotic range may
reflect on their strengths and
accomplishments, but usually not in a
reductive way that's designed to
suppress unwanted feelings. Their
positive self assessments exist
alongside an awareness of their
limitations rather than serving as a
defense against them. The same goes for
negative self-perceptions. Thoughts
like, "I'm the worst. I'm hideous.
Everyone hates me. I don't deserve to
exist." reflect negative splits in
self-image. No one is entirely good or
entirely bad. No one excels at
everything, and no one is without flaws
and limitations.
Individuals in the neurotic range of
functioning maintain a more balanced
self view, acknowledging both strengths
and weaknesses without falling into
polarized
extremes. You probably aren't the best,
but you're also probably not the worst.
You're likely somewhere in the middle.
And if the idea of being ordinary feels
threatening to your self-concept, if it
provokes feelings of emptiness,
insignificance, or fears of
annihilation, then you're likely engaged
in paranoid skitsoid distortions. Try to
allow yourself to simply be without
defining yourself in
absolutes. Sit with whatever discomfort
arises. Use the mindfulness and
acceptance strategies discussed earlier.
Remind yourself that thoughts and
feelings, no matter how intense, do not
have the power to annihilate you, even
if it feels like they
do. Okay, so we've examined the
differences between borderline and
neurotic functioning. We've discussed
the qualitative distinctions between the
paranoid, schizoid, and depressive
positions that underly each. And we've
discussed the steps in treatment that
facilitate movement toward more
consistent depressive functioning
alongside strategies that individuals
can use to cultivate the more balanced
perspectives on self and others that
characterize neurotic level integration.
As a side note, dialectical behavior
therapy or DBT was developed to help
individuals, particularly those with
borderline personality disorder, develop
more balanced perspectives and greater
emotional regulation. The dialectical
aspect of DBT refers to the ability to
integrate seemingly opposite
perspectives such as acceptance and
change or emotion and reason. This
capacity is characteristic of more
neurotic level functioning where
individuals can tolerate ambiguity and
complexity without resorting to
splitting or rigid defenses. DBT's wise
mind concept embodies this principle,
teaching individuals to engage in an
ongoing synthesis between emotional and
rational perspectives in order to
approach life with greater flexibility
and stability. I often recommend DBT to
patients who are seeking more specific
skills to help them develop neurotic
level capacities. As we've seen, the
stabilization of identity opens the door
not only to deeper connections and
mature love, but also to complex
emotional states such as grief, guilt,
longing, and the painful recognition of
one's own limitations.
In the next part, we'll examine how
individuals with neurotic level
narcissism manage these emotional
pressures through more mature
strategies. We'll explore the
characteristic defenses of this level
and how they appear in individuals with
narcissistic personality features. We'll
also look at therapy, what it's like to
work with someone at this level, what
challenges tend to arise, and how
treatment can help facilitate further
integration and growth. I hope you'll
join me for part three. Until next time,
take good care.
[Music]