Hi everyone, my name is Dr. Eatensson.
Welcome to Healing NPD. This is part
three of a four-part series exploring
the narcissistic personality style
across different levels of severity. In
part one, we explored psychotic level
NPD, laying the foundation for
understanding the core concepts used in
this series. In part two, we discussed
borderline level NPD, further
elaborating on the developmental
continuum of personality organization
and associated object relations. If you
haven't watched those videos yet, I
recommend checking them out first. Links
are in the description. In this episode,
we'll explore the narcissistic
personality style at the neurotic level
of organization. At this level, we're no
longer talking about personality
disorders. In neurotic organization,
there are sufficient ego strengths and
capacities to defend against the
significant distortions of thought,
feeling, and perception that are
typically associated with personality
disorders. Here we encounter mature
object relations and a more organized
sense of self. The shift to neurotic
organization symbolizes the emergence of
stable and coherent self and object
images, the capacity for mature grief
and remorse, and ultimately the ability
to love others in a more stable and
balanced way. Due to the length and
complexity of the material, this portion
of the series has been divided into
three separate videos. Each segment
explores a distinct facet of
narcissistic personality style at the
neurotic level of organization. This
first video serves as a conceptual
bridge between immature modes of
perceiving the self and others and the
mature integrated object relations that
are characteristic of neurotic
organization. It begins with a review of
key components of psychotic and
borderline experience, building on
material covered in previous episodes in
order to trace the arc of development
toward a more continuous and coherent
experience of self. The capacity to
recognize others as stable and
autonomous subjects and the growing
ability to tolerate ambivalence,
disappointment, and loss without
fragmentation.
The core features of this developmental
leap are identified and clearly
articulated, laying the conceptual
groundwork for the material that
follows. In the second video, we'll
explore the emotional consequences of
this shift. What does it mean to become
a subject with a history, to experience
mature guilt and loss, and to grieve
what cannot be repaired? We'll also
examine how this developmental shift
occurs. What kinds of experiences,
relationships, and psychological
capacities make it possible to move from
fragmentation toward integration? In the
third and final video, we'll examine the
defenses associated with neurotic level
functioning. We'll look closely at how
individuals at this level manage
internal conflict. And we'll also
explore how narcissism appears at this
level, what makes it different from
personality disordered narcissism and
the therapeutic dynamics that tend to
arise in treatment with these
individuals. So let's get started.
[Music]
The progression from psychotic to
healthy personality organization is a
journey of
self-defin. We're not born with anything
resembling a clear sense of self. As
infants, we have no concept of who or
what we are. The world is a blur of
sensations and impulses. It's only
through time and experience that mental
images of the self begin to emerge from
the deluge of sensory
information. In infancy, we begin to
make rudimentary distinctions between
experiences that feel continuous with
our own bodies, such as the warmth of a
caregiver's touch, the soft fluidity of
milk while nursing, the containment of
being swaddled or held, or the soothing
tones of a caregiver's voice. and
experiences that disrupt this sense of
sameness, bringing us into stark
contrast with the outside world.
Theorist and analyst Thomas Ogden refers
to these cohesive, uninterrupted
experiences of sameness as contiguous
experiences.
These are sensations that sustain a
feeling of safety and reassurance,
facilitating what Donald Winnott called
going on being, a state of unbroken
revery in which thought, feeling, and
perception are allowed to flow
undisturbed. These contiguous
experiences form the foundational
building blocks of a non-traumatized
self, providing a safety or refuge from
disruptive and overwhelming sensory
experiences of otherness. such as the
cold, hard surfaces of the external
world, sensations of hunger or pain.
Such experiences of otherness fracture
the infant's sense of sameness and
belonging, laying the foundation for
what will eventually emerge as images of
the self and others. In moderation, such
disruptions help form an essential
developmental milestone, the idea of a
bounded surface, a delineated place
where the self resides. However, when
these are too frequent or too intense,
they overwhelm the infant's fragile
self-structure, leading to developmental
trauma.
What is a self after all but a concept
defined by the interplay of sameness and
otherness, belonging and separation? We
don't start life thinking of ourselves
as selves. The concept of self is
learned and its development begins with
simple caregiving dynamics. Are we held
often enough? Are we fed when hungry? Is
it warm enough? Does caregiving occur
predictably and consistently, allowing
us to discern patterns in the sensations
that we
experience? Or are we left crying for
hours, overwhelmed by hunger, cold, and
isolation? These early experiences,
consistent responsive care versus
neglect and disorganization, shape the
first layers of self-image, forming the
foundation of our eventual adult
identities.
When early experience is overwhelmingly
other. When caregiving is chronically
insufficient, leaving the infant too
often terrified, cold or hungry without
reassurance. The proto cannot
consolidate into a stable kernel of
selfhood and the stage is set for the
disorganized, fragmented perceptions and
experiences that often characterize
psychotic level organization.
If however early experience is quote
good enough, allowing for a tolerable
balance of sameness and otherness, the
proto can consolidate, establishing a
kernel of self that resists the
fragmentation typical of psychotic
experiences. This allows us to progress
from psychotic to borderline
organization. Although the self remains
malleable, porous, and vulnerable to
confusion with the outside world,
reality testing, though still unstable,
becomes more
reliable. Borderline organization is
marked by intense ambivalence about
being a separate self. Self and object
images overlap, particularly during
heightened emotional states, resulting
in confusion about interpersonal
dynamics. Are you hurting me or am I
hurting you?
Relationships with individuals organized
at the borderline level often involve a
game of hot potato concerning who is the
bad
object. Bad feelings are projected onto
others, denied or acted out via
disorienting and sometimes frighteningly
intense interpersonal conflicts. The
self may also come under assault by
harsh or critical introjects, which are
internalized aspects of abusive or
inflexible caregivers that can lead to
depressive symptoms, unforgiving
self-criticism, self harm, or even
suicide. Borderline organization is
characterized by conflicts around
identity, control, and autonomy. When
someone gets too close, the individual
may feel invaded or overwhelmed and push
them away. Conversely, when someone
takes a step back, the individual may
feel abandoned or rejected, leading to
clinging dependency, idealization, or
otherwise blurred boundaries in attempt
to restore a sense of sameness. The
borderline self is inherently unstable
and highly context dependent. This
instability known as identity diffusion
is a hallmark of borderline states. Due
to the fragile self structure in both
psychotic and borderline organizations,
both levels are dominated by paranoid
anxiety, which is a fear of loss or
annihilation of self. However, this
anxiety manifests differently at each
level. In psychotic organization,
paranoid anxiety fuels reality
distorting defenses, producing
persistent existential dread and a sense
that the self could utterly dissolve or
annihilate at any moment. In borderline
organization, paranoid anxiety produces
persistent
egoentrism, a self-focus that impairs
empathy and makes it difficult or
impossible to see other people clearly.
Now, this isn't the same thing as
selfishness. It's a primitive anxiety
about annihilation of self that fuels
preoccupations with bodily and psychic
integrity and produces highly reactive
states of mind. Minor conflicts can feel
like lifealtering emergencies. A breakup
can seem like the end of the world.
Small inconveniences can activate parts
of the self that already feel on the
verge of collapse, provoking extreme
anxiety or rage.
At the borderline level, paranoid
anxiety combines with blurred images of
the self and others to create perceptual
distortions. Significant others, family
members, friends, and co-workers shift
in and out of clear focus, at times
appearing to embody extreme qualities
that are actually projections. A friend
can suddenly seem like an enemy. A loved
child can abruptly feel devalued or even
hated. This dynamic reflects a lack of
object constancy. Images of the self and
others do not remain stable or
realistic, but instead mirror the
internal polarizations of the borderline
personality
organization. These instabilities
reflect deficits in ego functions. The
self is too unstable and
undifferentiated to hold images of the
self and others constant in the face of
shifting emotions and circumstances.
Psychotic individuals distort reality to
manage paranoid anxiety while borderline
individuals distort their self-image and
images of other people to do the same
thing. The world becomes a distorted
mirror reflecting the individual's
internal instability. And these
distortions affect both the present and
memories of the past. When someone is
devalued, they're not just perceived as
worthless in the moment. Rather, the
entire history of the relationship is
rewritten to confirm that they were
always worthless. And the same process
applies to
self-perceptions. At the borderline
level, there is no historical subject.
Objects move in and out of focus with
new histories invented to accommodate
each shift. And this defense obliterates
history to remove accountability which
is experienced as too threatening. and
thereby triggers paranoid anxiety. The
borderline self is traumatized and it's
easily overrun with feelings of badness
that evoke paranoid anxiety. Such
anxieties can be neutralized by
redrawing the lines of self and others
so that the bad feelings are perceived
to exist in someone else or rewriting
history so that the self is no longer
guilty of having done anything wrong.
Familiar borderline level narratives
include statements that blameshift or
minimize consequences of their actions
like I only did it because you wouldn't
listen to me or you made me feel so bad
so I got you back
etc. In addition, splitting can produce
a devalued selfate that evokes
reassuring or sympathetic responses.
You're right. I'm terrible and I don't
deserve to live. or I'm such a horrible
person that I don't deserve love and I'm
not surprised that you hate me. In both
cases, there's an inability to construct
a balanced, moderate, and realistic
version of events where neither the self
nor the other becomes a bad object. This
dynamic makes apologies feel hollow or
manipulative. If someone hurts you and
then apologizes by insisting they're
such a terrible person that they don't
deserve to live, it forces you to take
care of them, shifting attention away
from the harm that they caused. It's
important to underscore that these
dynamics are not usually intentionally
manipulative. They reflect the
borderline individual's unstable self-
structure, paranoid anxiety, and
tendency to blur boundaries in response
to strong emotions.
That being said, without stable images
of the self and others, without history,
there can be no real accountability.
Ogden's term for this mode of perceiving
and relating is self as object. It's
where both the self and others are
experienced as interchangeable objects
rather than stable, enduring subjects
with histories that can't be rewritten
to manage anxiety. He writes, "In a
realm of objects as opposed to subjects,
safety is attained through qualitative
shifts and magical all or nothing
transformations. The past is constantly
changing and each new event radically
changes all previous ones. The present
is immediately projected onto all
previous experience, thus annihilating
the past. The past becomes merely a
fluid extension of the present. Only
when another person can no longer be
magically recreated does it become
possible to miss someone who is away or
to mourn someone who has died or who has
left permanently. When the other can be
experienced as having an existence
separate from one's own, it becomes
possible to be with that person and be
away from that person in an entirely
different way from that which had been
possible previously. End quote. This
inability to hold the past constant and
the tendency to treat both self and
others as interchangeable objects
prevents authentic experiences like
grief and
mourning. The ability to experience
mature love, loss, and sorrow depends on
perceiving others as distinct enduring
subjects who cannot be magically
replaced through fantasy and projection.
Mature love requires seeing oneself and
others as stable, autonomous beings with
an immutable history. This is the
developmental shift that allows the
transition from borderline to neurotic
organization, bringing with it the
capacity to experience life as a
subject, one who is capable of helping
or harming others in ways that cannot be
denied, erased, or undone.
So far, we've explored the movement from
borderline to neurotic level
organization. A developmental shift that
opens the door to a more stable and
enduring experience of self and others.
This transition brings new capacities,
the ability to sustain coherent self and
object images, to tolerate
contradictions, and to begin recognizing
the emotional and relational
consequences of our actions. But these
gains also come with a cost. In the next
video, we'll begin to examine what
becomes possible and what becomes
painful when the self stabilizes. We'll
look at how the loss of defensive
fragmentation gives way to a deeper kind
of grief and how the capacity for
continuity also introduces the burdens
of guilt, accountability, and loss. I
hope you'll continue with part two.
Until next time, take good care.
[Music]