What causes severe developmental arrest
in one child may produce no discernable
issues at all in another. Different
children have different needs, different
thresholds and resiliencies. Even
siblings raised in the same family can
have dramatically different childhoods
depending on what was happening at
crucial points in their early
development. If you're attacked in an
alleyway, you will immediately regress
to a borderline mode of thinking and
perceiving. The attacker is bad and
you're in existential danger. Your
thoughts will be dominated by paranoid
anxiety, the fear of annihilation. In
that moment, there's no room for nuance
or empathy. You're not concerned with
the attacker's backstory, socioeconomic
conditions, or systemic factors.
Survival is the only concern.
The fact that your perception of
imminent danger is accurate in this
particular situation is beside the
point. The state of mind itself is
essentially the same as what borderline
or psychotic individuals experience only
far more frequently and in a greater
variety of situations. For psychotic or
borderline individuals, this
hypervigilant all or nothing mode of
perception can be triggered not just by
a violent assault, but by something as
minor as a perceived slight at the deli.
Regardless of the objective threat, the
physiological and psychological response
is essentially the same. Ultimately, the
defining difference between immature and
mature personality organizations is the
capacity to face a wider variety of
situations without resorting to
perceptual distortions in order to
manage paranoid
anxiety. Broadly speaking, the
psychoanalytic term for the mode of
organizing experience that underlies
both psychotic and borderline
organizations is the paranoid schizoid
position. The paranoid aspect refers to
the individual's basic stance toward the
world as populated by dangerous,
hateful, attacking objects from which
good experience must be defended. The
skitsoid aspect refers to the central
tendency of splitting that defines this
mode of experiencing. The good must be
kept separate from the bad, creating
rigid categories of all good and all bad
experience that feel too dangerous to
mix. If badness contaminates goodness,
it activates paranoid anxiety, the fear
of total annihilation of all internal
goodness. This in turn reaffirms the
necessity of continued splitting and
fragmentation.