Hey guys, I'm Heidi Preb. Welcome back
to my channel or welcome if you're new
here. For the past couple of months on
this channel, we've been talking about
resilience. And to start rounding off
this series, I want to talk today about
which traits make someone hard to
manipulate.
And before we get into the meat and
potatoes of this, I want to just offer
up the perspective that a lot of things
that happen, particularly inside of
relationships that involve two
insecurely attached people that are
manipulative, are not necessarily
intentional. So, if you want to get
incredibly technical, all insecure
attachment styles are are ways that we
have learned to unconsciously manipulate
our environments to get our needs met.
And this does not mean that the people
doing this manipulating have bad intent
or are actively aiming to kind of take
over somebody else's autonomy. But what
we're going to go over today, these
traits that make us resilient in the
face of manipulation are likely to go a
long way in serving the health of both
the person using them and the health of
their relationship. Because essentially
what these strategies are are strategies
for getting back into secure
functioning. So this is going to protect
us both against overt forms of
manipulation that might be more
intentional but also against more
unintentional ones that are just kind of
the natural outflow of insecure
strategies doing the best that they can
to connect. And the other thing I just
want to touch on before we get started
is that sometimes our attachment systems
or our early trauma patterns can lead us
to overperceive of things as
manipulative when they are in fact
offerings that are made in good faith.
And so we're also going to look at areas
where we might be prone to interpreting
things as manipulative that might
actually not fit that bill. So those are
the two kind of caveats I want to give
before we dive into this. But without
further ado, we'll talk about five
things you might want to work on if you
want to become impervious as much as you
can be to
manipulation. The first thing you want
to do is you want to look at closing the
gap as much as you're able to between
the way that you like to think of
yourself or the way that you might even
need to think of yourself in order to
stay regulated most of the time and the
way that you actually
are. So to be insecurely attached in any
form means to have a lot of blind spots.
So a lot of areas where you haven't done
that shadow work and gotten comfortable
with the parts of yourself that are not
cleanly aligned with your kind of ego
story about yourself. And generally when
we have these big blind spots, what
happens is that we have kind of fixed or
rigid identities because when we need to
think of ourselves in very narrow and
particular ways in order to stay
regulated and in order to keep
respecting ourselves, the problem is
that anytime we happen into a situation
where a trait that is not congruent with
our ego or the way that we like to think
of ourselves is in fact the best trait
to use to navigate that specific
scenario, we are going to default to the
trait that we like more and then feel
manipulated or in a lot of cases
actually get manipulated. So what does
this look like in concrete terms? What
this looks like is, for example, if I
need to always think of myself as a kind
and generous person, all somebody has to
do to manipulate me consciously or
otherwise is to present me with a
situation where a kind and generous
person would necessarily do the thing
that they want me to do. And if I
absolutely need to think of myself as
that kind of person in order to keep
feeling okay about myself, I'm going to
feel like my hands are kind of tied in
terms of the choices that are available
to me in that situation. And so this
could be something that turns into a
real way that people manipulate us. Or
it could be one of those areas where we
feel chronically manipulated even though
there actually was another option
available to us. On the flip side of the
attachment spectrum, let's say you have
a scenario where the options are be
dependent on some person or institution
in some significant way or branch off
and do things your own way. If the only
way you are capable of self-regulating
is knowing that you are in complete
control at all times, you are almost
always going to choose that latter
choice. And if someone wanted to
manipulate you in some conscious or
unconscious way, it's likely that all
they would have to do is present you
with a forced choice where those are
your two options. And the thing that
they want you to do is the thing that
would provide you with more
independence. And once again, this can
also lead us into scenarios where we
feel manipulated when in reality other
people are able to accurately perceive
the choices that were available to us
that we did not even consider as options
because they were so non-ongruent with
our egos. So the opposite of this trait
of having a very fixed identity is
having a flexible identity. And this is
generally what we develop once we have
done that shadow work of excavating the
parts of ourselves that include the ways
we really do not want to think of
ourselves as. So finding the parts of us
that are in fact selfish under the right
conditions that are in fact dependent
and trusting under the right conditions
and then learning that we can pull those
parts of ourselves out when they are
needed. And when we're able to do that
and we're able to access all parts of
our personality, not just the parts that
we need to feel like we consistently
inhabit, then we're going to be much
more impervious to any form of coercion
that comes from outside of us because we
now have an adaptable and flexible skill
set that allows us to show up
differently based on what the situation
calls for. Second thing we can do that
works in the direction of being hard to
manipulate is become incredibly aware of
what flips us into a 4F response and
what it feels like to be in one versus
to be regulated. So when I say a 4F
response, I'm referring to fight,
flight, freeze, or fawn responses. And
these are all layers of trauma
programming that come online in our
systems when we feel incredibly
threatened. Now, the first thing I want
to make clear is that we need these
responses. We do not want to get rid of
the instinctual part of ourselves that's
able to respond appropriately and
swiftly to danger. But for those of us
who have trauma patterns in our past,
very often what happens is that we flip
into one of these four responses in
scenarios where the danger that our body
thinks it's protecting us from is in
fact not present. The problem is that
when we have these responses come
online, the first thing that gets
hijacked is the critical part of our
minds that's able to reason well about
the situation at hand. And we might
instinctively go into either a fight
response, so trying to overcome our
environment with force, a flight
response, so trying to escape the
situation at hand, a fawn response, so
giving into whoever it is that we
believe has the most authority around
us, or a freeze response, so kind of
losing our sense of autonomy and staying
immobilized inside of a situation that
it might be better for us to mobilize
within. Now there are two main reasons
why it's good to be aware of when we are
in these states. One very cleanly is
that we don't want to be decisionmaking
on any important things that have
long-term consequences when we are in
one of these states. So what we don't
want to be doing is signing business
deals or making major decisions about a
relationship when we are operating from
an unconscious trauma response. At least
not most of the time. Those are likely
to be decisions that might get us out of
the present- moment situation that feels
threatening, but that is unlikely to
integrate well into the rest of our
lives because we made those decisions
from an unintegrated place. So if we can
start noticing when we are in one of
these states and develop strategies for
delaying any important forms of
decision-m until we are out of this
state, it is going to give us a lot more
flexibility and prevent us from
potentially making choices under
pressure that we are not actually
comfortable with. So, this might mean
noticing over a period of time that you
tend to go into a fawn response when
you're pressured to make decisions
quickly and learning to compensate for
that by developing strategies for what
you will do when you feel that pressure
coming on and maybe having a go-to
phrase you use like I like to give
myself 24 to 48 hours to think through
any major decision I make. So, I'm going
to get back to you on this, which is
going to help you in a lot of things
like sales calls. And often when we have
these strategies in place for ourselves,
it actually allows us to go into
situations feeling more relaxed and
authentic in the first place. So during
the brief period of my life where I went
on a couple of first dates from dating
apps, I used to have a strategy that I
would use because I would feel so
uncomfortable at the thought of kissing
on the first date that I would preoccupy
myself with the fear of it throughout
the entire date. And then I started
telling people before meeting up with
them that I just have a policy that I
don't really like to kiss or even have a
lot of touch on first dates and just
checked in to make sure they were okay
with that before meeting up. And that
allowed me to actually relax into the
experience and not get stuck in those
moments of freeze because I knew that
I'd set up my boundaries proactively in
a way that would prevent me from going
into one of those potential 4F
responses. And of course, we can't
always do this perfectly. But there's a
second reason why we want to start being
more aware of our 4F responses in
relation to manipulation. Unfortunately,
one of the easiest ways to kind of get
inside of somebody's head is try to
convince someone that their trauma
response is who they are. Now, what I
want to be clear about here is that yes,
our trauma responses are absolutely
parts of who we are, but they are
unintegrated parts of who we are. So, if
we come out with a whole bunch of force
when we're in a fight energy, that does
not mean that the core of our
personality is a selfish and borish
person who wants to fight all the time.
But it's easy to start getting a kind of
confused sense of identity. Like, who am
I? Am I this angry, abusive person or am
I this kind, well-meaning person? And
any place where we are very disregulated
around what our own identity is and who
we are as a person is going to be an
easy spot for someone else to manipulate
us from because all they have to do is
guilt us in a regulated state into
believing that who we are when we're
disregulated is who we actually are. And
that's going to kind of play on all of
these insecurities and fears that we
might have about oursel. Now, what I
want to be super clear about here is
once again, we do want to be taking
responsibility for and owning what we do
in a trauma response. But the way to do
this properly and safely is to become
trauma aware. So, if the trait here that
makes you easy to manipulate is being
traumablind, the reverse trait is being
traumainformed. So, the cleanest example
I can think of, I was once having an
argument with a friend and I flipped
into one of my four F responses and I
became quite disoriented. I was kind of
fawning and saying things that honestly
didn't make clear sense. And the next
day, that same friend texted me and said
something kind of mocking about the text
that I'd sent the night before in a
disregulated state. And this was one of
the first times when I was actually
quite aware that what had happened was I
was dregulated at the time that I'd sent
that text. And then overnight waking up
the next morning, I'd return to
regulation. And so I responded to the
text saying, "Yes, last night I sent
that text that didn't make a lot of
sense when I was in a really
disregulated state. But now I'm
regulated and I don't like the way that
you are speaking to me about it. I'm
uncomfortable with the mocking tone."
And that shifted the tone of the
conversation very quickly. And this is
precisely what happens when we develop a
meta awareness of our own psychology.
And we can notice when we are in a
triggered or disregulated state versus
when we are in a calm, regulated one.
And we can communicate that clearly and
with dignity to other people. Again,
this does not mean we avoid
responsibility, but it means we refuse
to collapse into narratives that blend
our trauma responses with our deeper
intentions or true character. And the
better we get at this, the better we get
at navigating situations like this as a
whole. Because when we can separate out
our trauma responses from our deep sense
of integrity that guides our decisions
when we are regulated, we can start
working with both of those things much
more effectively. Third thing that's
going to make you very hard to
manipulate. Learn to stand behind your
feelings simply because you care about
the way that you feel. So one of the
biggest traps that I see people getting
sucked into, particularly those of us
who air insecurely attached in any form
once again is thinking that we cannot
act on our feelings until we can explain
them perfectly logically. And that's
generally because we do not have that
internal compass built in the way secure
people do that allows us to just kind of
trust that gut feeling when something is
off or at the least hold a strong grain
of salt in place when that gut feeling
is off. So the cleanest example I can
think of with this. I once dated someone
who when I was getting to know them was
really wonderful and lovely. But as our
relationship deepened, I noticed that
there were some things they would say or
do that felt like very subtle digs and I
couldn't really tell, am I just being
oversensitive here or are they genuinely
taking kind of stabs at me? And when I
tried talking to them about it, they had
a lot of excuses and defenses. And so I
really started sitting with it and
going, "Okay, what's going on here?" And
I went online and I started looking
things up like signs of emotional abuse.
And I got really in my head about this
question. what's going on here? Is this
person displaying narcissistic
patterning? Is this emotional abuse? And
it felt like there was tons of potential
evidence on either side of the debate.
But when it came down to it, when I was
really quiet with myself, there was
something I knew for sure, which was
that around this person, both on a
day-to-day basis as well as when I tried
to raise issues with them, I just didn't
feel very good about myself. And when I
was with myself or around my friends, I
generally did feel pretty good about
myself. And I realized that that was
justification in and of itself for me to
end the relationship. I didn't have to
be able to place someone definitively
into some category in my head in order
to value the way that I felt. I just
felt bad around them. And I didn't want
to feel bad most of the time in the
relationship that I spent the most time
in. And so the trait that we're looking
at here that makes us easy to manipulate
is the trait of deference of always
needing what we feel to be confirmed by
some outside authority in order for us
to decide that we can make a decision
based on it. And the opposite of this
trait is the trait of selfrespect. So
being able to say to ourselves and other
people, I don't need to be able to
perfectly explain what I want or what
I'm feeling in order for me to take the
way I feel as valuable information and
to make decisions on it. This is always
going to be the trump card in situations
where people are trying to manipulate us
by finding ways to trap us in whatever
logic we present to them. The only trump
card that always wins in that argument
is I am doing this because I want to or
I am not doing this because I don't want
to and I don't feel the need to explain
my reasoning beyond that. There is very
little that someone can argue back
around that. But it takes that sense of
dignity and self-respect to be able to
say to ourselves and other people, I am
making a decision based on how I feel,
not based on how anybody else perceives
this or needs me to explain it. Fourth
trait that makes people very hard to
manipulate is being able to tolerate
being disliked, misunderstood, or left
alone. These are three massive trigger
points for a lot of people that anyone
who wants to be intentionally
manipulative is likely to try
capitalizing on first. And the reason
why these are so easy to capitalize on
is because these three emotions are
pretty distressing and hard to tolerate
for most of us, but especially so for
those of us who have extra wounds on top
of these areas. And this does kind of
hark directly back to point number one.
We want to make sure that we are
integrating the parts of ourselves that
we find difficult to tolerate or be
with. But I want to touch more directly
on some examples of what that might look
like because again, these three are
major pain points for a lot of us. So,
I'll never forget a workshop I went to
one time where one of the participants
in the workshop said something to me in
a group setting that I felt was a gross
misinterpretation of what I'd just said.
And I noticed instantly a kind of panic
response starting to come online in my
body. and I automatically wanted to
launch into overexlaining myself so that
we could get back into shared reality.
And the instructor made a really cool
move. And he went, "Can you pause for a
moment and just be present with your
body before
responding?" And I said, "Well, I'm
struggling cuz I just feel really
misunderstood and I just want to clarify
what I meant." And he went, "That's
fine. Before you do that, can you pause
and notice what it feels like in your
body to be holding the tension of
feeling
misunderstood? And I sat with it and I
noticed how deeply uncomfortable it was
for me to be with that sensation of
being unable to communicate what I
wanted to communicate. How it made me
kind of clench all of my muscles and how
the energy was just coursing through my
body rapidly. And I will forever think
back to that moment as the first of a
long series of reps that I started doing
to train the muscle of being
misunderstood without instinctively
responding. Now what happened in that
scenario and in a lot of future
scenarios was that I eventually did
respond to the person and got in the
shared reality with them. But it was
very cool to even conceive of the idea
that there was value in being able to
tolerate the feeling of being
misunderstood, of being able to sit with
that feeling, be present with it, and
notice that I was surviving it. The
greater we build up our tolerance for
staying with distressing emotions
without immediately needing to rectify
them, the more we are at choice about
how we end up responding to them.
So if we cannot tolerate the idea that
someone might dislike us or
misunderstand us or abandon us, if we
think that that is so intolerable that
we instinctively react the second we
feel even remotely threatened that any
of those things might happen, what we're
once again probably doing is responding
from one of those 4F responses. And once
again, this is very often the place
where we end up making decisions we
regret from. So the opposite trait to
this is the trait of
selfrestraint. So if we want to be more
resilient in this area, what we want to
do is start training that muscle that
allows us to stop, pause, hold the
discomfort in our body, and then be at
choice about responding to the scenario.
Because if someone knows that we cannot
tolerate being misunderstood, what's the
simplest thing they can do to get us in
a 4F response? They can deliberately say
something to us that makes us feel
misunderstood. And now our nervous
system is hijacked and we are more
likely to make whatever decision they
want us to make when we are in that
state. Same goes if you are terrified of
abandonment. All someone has to do to
put you in a fawn response is probably
threaten abandonment subtly or overtly.
And so the more we can train these
muscles, the more agile our response
system becomes and we can stop and ask
ourselves the question, is this
something that is truly a
misunderstanding or am I being baited
here? And do I want to go into that
trigger response or do I maybe want to
remove myself from this situation and
come back to it when my distress level
is lower? And of course, this is not
limited to those three emotions.
Essentially, any distressing feeling
that you cannot tolerate without
immediately responding to is a button
you have that someone else is going to
be able to press if they notice it to
get you into one of those 4F responses.
So, notice what it is that you are most
afraid of, that you become most panicked
around, and learn to stay present with
the distressing feeling in your body for
at least 5 to 10 seconds. And then you
can gradually increase your tolerance
level before responding. It is going to
go a very long way in helping you not
get hijacked by your nervous system in
moments where you really want that
reasoning part of your brain to stay
online. And then fifth thing you're
going to want to work on if you want to
become hard to manipulate is learn to
desenter yourself from your narratives
about why other people are doing what
they're doing. So, I have a whole
YouTube video on this called How to Stop
Taking Things Personally. But the idea
behind it is that we can accidentally
end up in a lot of fake power struggles
in life by inaccurately projecting
intent onto other people. And I believe
this is one of the biggest reasons why
people tend to perceive manipulation in
areas where it doesn't truly exist.
Because for some of us, it is actually
less threatening to think that somebody
was maliciously and intentionally trying
to hurt us than it is to think that they
were actually not thinking that much
about us at all. And the way that they
hurt us was just collateral damage to
something else that they wanted to do.
And I think that this is probably one of
the biggest things that get people
locked in power struggles that never
resolve is the assumption on behalf of
one or both people that the thing the
other person did to hurt them was
intentional rather than the unfortunate
byproduct of something else. And so to
get better at this, what we want to do
is develop the skill of
differentiation. Differentiation is when
we are able to hold ourselves and our
own response patterns in conscious
awareness when we are in connection with
someone else. This is going to help us
start separating out what is happening
here because of what I'm bringing in.
What is happening here because the other
person is bringing it in and where are
those things overlapping. So those of us
who come from the more anxious side of
the spectrum and have more inshment
patterning tend to have a bias towards
believing that most of how other people
make us feel was intentional in some
way. And those of us on the avoidant
side of the spectrum tend to have the
kind of opposite bias, which is that
everybody is just out for their own good
and that relational dynamics are not
really co-created in any significant
way. And so what we want to start doing
here is getting really accurate about
it. So checking with other people when
we have an assumption about why they did
something, why they may have done that,
or even just as a thought experiment,
asking ourselves, is there a reason they
might have done this that was not
malicious or directly targeted at me?
And what might that reason be? And
again, this might surprisingly bring up
the fear of abandonment. Because once
again, it is often more threatening to
think of ourselves as absent from
someone's worldview than it is to think
of ourselves as a target of their
worldview. And what I'm not saying here
is that there is never situations where
people are targeting us in any way. But
I do think that this is one of the most
common and persistent mentalizing errors
that people with insecure attachment
patterns tend towards that end up
creating power struggles that are false
because what's actually happening gets
missed in the midst of a series of
projections that this tends to evoke. So
just to quickly recap those five traits,
what we want to start developing inside
of ourselves if we want to be very
resilient in the face of real or
unintentional manipulations, we want to
do that shadow work and start getting
comfortable with the parts of ourselves
that are not automatically egoongruent.
We want to become trauma aare and start
working with those 4F responses so that
we can notice when they're coming online
and have strategies we employ for not
getting hijacked by them and minimize
the decisions that we end up making from
a traumatized space. We want to develop
that selfrespect and the capacity to
stand up for ourselves simply because we
know what we want and don't want without
needing to explain ourselves perfectly.
We need to be able to practice
self-restraint, the ability to be with
unpleasant feelings before automatically
responding. And we want to get good at
differentiation, understanding other
people's worlds without placing
ourselves at the imagined center of
them.
So, as always, if you have any questions
or any comments coming up as you go
through this video or any traits that
you would recommend curating and
developing inside of yourself in order
to be harder to manipulate, please leave
them below. As always, I love you guys.
I hope you're taking care of yourselves
and each other. And I will see you back
here again really soon.